Making Manuscripts Searchable: DEx, a Database

of Dramatic Extracts, Digital Publication, and Boutique Projects

Laura Estill

lestill@tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Too often, people lament that we have no evidence of what Shakespeare's readers
thought. In reality, we have quite a bit of evidence, but it has been difficult
to access because of the cost of travel and the barrier to access caused by
early modern handwriting. This paper describes how DEx: A Database of Dramatic
Extracts (beta version) contributes to the changing landscape of digital
projects that help us better understand the early modern period. Rather than
focusing on one person (too often, a canonical male literary figure), DEx
instead makes a wide range of reader responses to early modern drama
searchable, bringing together resources that are held in geographically distant
archives, from Oxford's Bodleian Library to the Folger Shakespeare Library in
Washington, D.C.

Dramatic extracts (those parts from plays that people copied into their
notebooks) are important evidence because they tell what early modern audiences
and readers took, literally and figuratively, from plays. Right now, this
important evidence of reader response is difficult to access for multiple
reasons: firstly, these extracts are often uncatalogued and therefore hard
to locate. Secondly, they are dispersed across multiple archives and require
travel funding to reach (see Ioppolo 2004). Finally, they are written in early
handwriting, and so require paleographical training to read. This paper
examines the ways in which DEx, a comparatively small project, links to
existing resources and draws on community to ultimately provide people access
to evidence of what Shakespeare's readers thought. (Spoiler: it turns out they
thought about other playwrights more than Shakespeare in his lifetime!) DEx
complements the Folger Union First Line Index and the Catalogue of English
Literary Manuscripts by making the full text of dramatic extracts searchable
and by not being constrained to selections written in verse (like the former)
or by canonical authors (like the latter). DEx includes materials that are not
catalogued in CELM or repository catalogues, and invites scholars to contribute
relevant citations, transcriptions, or leads they have.

DEx's transcriptions are part of what makes it so valuable. Despite advances in
OCR (Optical Character Recognition) technologies, there is no adequate program
to automatically recognize handwritten text: particularly when it comes to
historical documents written in scripts that we no longer use today, such
as chancery hand or secretary hand. While digital paleography is an ongoing
area of research, it tends to focus now on transcribing and describing texts by
hand or on teaching paleography with digital tools (Stokes,

2014, 2015; Rehbein et al 2009, esp. 110-338; Fischer

et al 2010; Hassner et al, 2013). Many digital projects that focus on early
modern English texts are hand-transcribed and encoded: consider, for instance,
the Folger Shakespeare Library's Early Modern Manuscripts Online and 
Shakespeare's World, The Recipes Project or Bess of Hardwick's Letters.
Transcriptions in DEx are undertaken by a small community of scholars: this
paper explains how our community currently works and the future collaborations
we hope to undertake, as well as the possible avenues for extending the project
after its forthcoming full launch.

In 2010, Paul Conway argued that “We are at the end of ‘boutique' digital
scanning projects for which the principal goal is ... extraordinary attention
to the unique properties of each artifact” (76). This paper contends that with
early modern manuscripts, “boutique” projects are one of the best ways forward.
Compared to massive manuscript digitization projects like British Literary
Manuscripts Online, DEx is a “boutique” project actually make texts searchable
with transcription, which is always the result of paying attention to each
manuscript as a “unique artifact.” This paper discusses the challenges that
come with curating a boutique project and the ultimate benefits of having
a small site that emerges from a specific set of research questions.

Although small digitization or transcription projects can open up a vast field
of research, they need to be findable and peer-reviewed in order to do so. I
examine the obstacles to having DEx published by a traditional publisher, while
questioning how to define publication for digital projects and the costs
associated with creating and maintaining an open access site. Furthermore, I
discuss how digital publishing must address the peer review needs of
emerging scholars and provide an imprimatur and guarantee of

quality for users. The final section of this paper discuss the role of Iter:
Gateway to the Middle Ages and Renaissance and ReKN: Renaissance Knowledge
Network in publication and peer review for DEx: A Database of Dramatic Extracts
. This is an appropriate short paper for DH 2017 because it discusses a project
that is in beta and active development, it engages the larger questions of how
and why boutique digital projects can flourish and provide value to humanities
scholarship, and it engages the theme of “Access/Accès” by focusing on
collaboration, public-facing scholarship, and digital humanities publication.
The paper focuses on a single case study: DEx: A Database of Dramatic Extracts 
and its community, which addresses a much-needed gap in scholarship by
transcribing manuscripts that tell us what Shakespeare's audience and readers
actually read.

