Reverse Engineering the First Humanities Computing Center

Steven E. Jones

stephenjones@usf.edu

University of South Florida, United States of America

Julianne Nyhan

j.nyhan@ucl.ac.uk

University College London, England

Geoffrey Rockwell

geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca

University of Alberta, Canada

Stefan Sinclair

stefan.sinclair@mcgill.ca

McGill University, Canada

Melissa Terras

m.terras@ucl.ac.uk

University College London, England

How can digital methods be used to conceptualize historical research projects,
including their teams, approaches, methods, and outputs? What methodologies can
be used to synthesize and analyze archival records, workshop plans,
photographic evidence, and oral histories? This co-authored paper describes an
ongoing effort by a collaborative group* to understand and recover the work of
Father Roberto Busa, commonly thought to be the “founding father” of Digital
Humanities. Starting in 1949, Roberto Busa, S.J., began a landmark
collaboration with IBM to build a lemmatized concordance to the works of St.
Thomas Aquinas. In 1956 Busa founded the world's first humanities computing
center in Gallarate, Italy, located after 1961 in a former textile factory
stocked with rows of IBM punched-card machines. This was CAAL, the Centro per
L'Automazione deWAnalisi Letteraria—the Center for the Automation of Literary
Analysis. There Busa and his mostly female student operators processed the
monumental Index Thomisticus, a selection of the Dead Sea Scrolls, and other
texts, from 1961-1967 (Terras and Nyhan, 2016; Jones 2016). However, there
is much that is still unknown about Busa's research approach and methods. We
aim to recover what Busa and his operators did. By repurposing punched-card
office machinery for literary data processing, Busa created an important
pre-computing technology platform for humanities research, one which has become
obscured over time. We aim to reverse engineer and reconstruct not just a
particular technology (punched-card machines) but that first humanities
computing center as a whole. By doing so, we will explore methods that can be
useful for other historians as they look back upon site-specific projects and
groups, using digital tools and methods to effectively interleave and
investigate historical data sources.

Jeffrey Schnapp of Harvard's metaLAB has remarked that “every cultural object
is a network” (Schnapp, 2015). Reverse engineering involves taking apart a
device or system not to replicate it but in order to better understand its
design and purpose, its networked relations. The goal in this case is to break
down and experimentally reconstruct the networked cultural
objects--including specific machines, architecture, infrastructure, and human
operators--that amount to the components of that Italian humanities computing
center, and in that way to model a more capacious idea of “digitization”
itself. We make use of a cluster of convergent practices:

1. The digitization of archives--paper-based documents with Dublin Core
derived metadata, but also 3D digitizations of physical artifacts such as
punched cards, relay switches, etc.

2. A cultural-heritage virtual model of the architectural space, a 3D immersive
environments of the center itself, created through basic photogrammetry and
using Maya + the Unity engine, based on multiple archival images, as well as
new scans of the building, still standing outside Milan (though much altered).

3. Emulations of forgotten or obsolete technologies, punched-card data
processing systems as well as other “adjacent” technologies in the 1950s and
1960s.

4. Oral histories and audio-files of interviews with surviving punched-card
operators, Busa's secretaries, and others

The overall objective is to model this important early research center and its
activities through a series of purpose-driven and interlinked emulations, 3D
spaces, oral histories, and digitized documents and artifacts. We employ
metadata to map archival materials and emulations onto the models in order to
understand the material history of what is usually taken to be the first
humanities computing center. In the process, we complicate the key terms
themselves, including first and computing.)

Most of what has been known to date about Busa's

early literary data processing was derived from a handful

of his own publications- first by Winter (1999); later,

Jones (2016) drew on the Busa Archive to contextualize and extend his narrative
account. Rockwell and Sinclair (2014) and Terras and Nyhan (2016), have
continued to clarify the story in different ways. Actually modeling
the machinery and workflow allows us to address specific questions about this
important moment in the birth of linguistic data processing and humanities
computing, such as:

• What were the precise roles played by human operators between the automated
stages, sorting card decks, lemmatizing word lists, programming machines
via plugboards, etc.? (How were these roles stratified and gendered?)

• What source texts were used for input and how were they prepared and marked
up so that the operators could use them as the basis for what they punched on
the cards?

• At what stage did IBM agree to print customized punched cards with what
amounted to data fields unique to Busa's projects? What was the nature of the
data ontology behind these customizations?

• What is the evidence that the work of Busa's center contributed to larger
technology developments at IBM, such as Peter Luhn's development of the
influential KWIC (keyword in context) protocol for information retrieval?

Additional questions will surely arise during the ongoing process of modeling
and cross-checking archival materials and oral histories.

Although Busa's humanities computing center is our focus, we believe this
methodological approach would be useful in other instances, as a way to
conceive of digitization as a process of modeling artifacts and documents
in relation to technology and infrastructure. We draw on theoretical approaches
and methods associated with media archaeology (Parikka, 2012; Emerson, 2014;
Rockwell and Sinclair, 2014; Sinclair, 2016), creative historical prototyping
(U Victoria Maker Lab; Sayers et al, 2016), the archaeology of science (Haigh,
2016; Schiffer, 2001), and on the methods and expertise of digital
archaeology in the field of cultural heritage, including its attention
to issues of access and preservation (Koller, 2009; London Charter, 2009).

The presentation at DH 2017 will include slides containing selections from the
800 historical photographs of Busa's center, as well as other images, audio
files, and demonstrations, including a prototype 3D virtual model of the
center. The paper will explain the project's practical aims and theoretical
significance: for example, we address current debates in digital humanities
about the influence of text-based analysis on today's definitions
and practices; or debates about possible alternative genealogies for DH (Klein,
2012). It will also spotlight the role of gendered labor in early humanities
computing, and the entanglements of early humanities technology research with
corporate and government funding. Our broader methodological purpose is to take
up in practice what Jeffrey Schnapp has called the “defining design challenge
of our epoch”—“to weave together information and space in a meaningful fashion”
(Schnapp, 2015), and the methods will be of interest and use to others who are
approaching multimodal archives and interpolating the information therein.

Acknowledgements

In addition to the coauthors of this paper, contributors to

the overall project include Marco Passarotti and Paolo

Senna (Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan).

