Semantic Domains in

Picasso's Poetry

Luis Meneses

ldmm@cs.tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Enrique Mallen

mallen.shsu@gmail.com

Sam Houston State University, United States of America

The question of why Pablo Picasso dedicated a considerable amount of his time
to writing around 1935 is open to speculation. Many have cited the Spanish
artist's emotional crisis, the political turmoil in Europe in the period
between the two wars, and the menace of a fratricidal confrontation in Spain
as possible causes. All of these views are predicated on an assumed irreducible
conflict between visual composition and verbal expression. However, it should
be considered that Picasso's interest in alternative methods of expression
might have stemmed from his fascination with linguistic structure as a whole
during his cubist period. To quote Marie-Laure Bernadac: “I am in complete
agreement with [the] linguistics of cubism as a structural language. Picasso is
very conscious of the ambivalence of language, the ambivalence of words ...
Picasso always played with the ambivalence of words ... The papiers collés [may
be thought of] as ‘proverbs'; that is, as things that take the place of the
verb ‘to paint' ... The battle between word and image, between art and reality,
between different systems of signs ... but one must never forget that Picasso's
cubism is two things at once; it's painting and it's language ... His whole
life he was obsessed with the relationship between painting and writing ... the
battle between word and image, between art and reality” (Rubin et al., 1992).
Many other authors have pointed out the parallel development of
structural linguistics as delineated by Ferdinand de Saussure and the
explorations of the different phases of cubism by Picasso, Braque and Gris.

The connection between his writings and his plastic works has been explored by
Cowling (2002), who refers to both his poems and his artworks as executed in a
“spider's web” style: “A glance at the manuscripts reveals that he was
attentive to the look and lay-out of the pages, relishing the dramatic impact
of such things as variations in the size and style of the script, changes in
the flow of ink or the thickness of the nib (and the color when he used
crayons), contrasts between letters, numbers, dividing lines and the
special punctuation marks he favored, different systems for crossing-out and
large blots of ink. The calligraphy varies a good deal and is sometimes ornate
and the effect handsome and arresting”. For a similar position, we may turn to
Baldassari (Picasso and Baldas-sari, 2005), who poses a clear link between
Picasso's visual works and his poetry: “In the decade between 1925 and 1935 ...
Picasso continued to pursue cursive linearity in canvases where poetic shapes
and ideograms represented bathers and acrobats. The scrolling lines, bursting
constellations, curving grids, and broad strokes that cross the surface of his
pictorial work then found a new dimension in his poetic writing. Breton fully
sensed its importance ... ‘This poetry is unfailingly visual in the same way
that the painting is poetic'”. Earlier, Daix (Daix and Emmet, 1993) had

pointed out that “Picasso did not believe in spontaneous poetry - or painting.
His attitude was that of a professional: someone who had put written fragments
into his paintings and could certainly paint poems as well. The graphism of his
letters and the way they were placed on a page were also a deliberate, visual
creation”. Despite the close correlation between Picasso's poems and his
artworks, one cannot deny that Picasso's poetry is essentially verbal, and not
conditioned by plastic principles. This is precisely what makes Picasso's
poetry so interesting: it provides a window into Picasso's mind that is
separate from his own artistic creations.

Our research has taken us through different approaches in order to analyze
Picasso's artistic legacy (Meneses et al., 2008a, Meneses et al., 2011) and
his poetry. In our study of Picasso's writings, we first created a concordance
of all of his poems and plays, separating the poems by language (Spanish
and French) (Meneses et al., 2008b). We then designed a dictionary based on
this bilingual concordance of poems that was dynamically generated, identifying
the stanzas and lines of each poem. A third step led us to provide an English
translation to every French and Spanish term, which allowed us to reduce the
number of concepts that Picasso works with. This reduction improved clarity for
two reasons: First, we eliminated the language distinction (Spanish vs.
French); and second, because we merged morphological variation into single
units, so that tense/mood alterations for verbs, and gender/number differences
for the noun, for instance, were bypassed. As a result, we ended up with three
lexical lists: one for Spanish terms, one for French terms, and one with
English translations that links the first two lists. The third lexical list may
be considered a semantic dictionary specifying concrete concepts in Picasso's
writings.

However, we felt that some aspects of Picasso's poetry needed further
exploration. In this paper we propose to explore the possibility that Picasso's
transition into poetry is simply one more manifestation of his pursuit of
alternative approaches to language as a means of representation. In this sense,
one thing that remained to be determined was how concrete concepts in both
languages cluster into representative semantic categories; and how these
categories interact with each other in semantic networks. For this purpose, we
have expanded upon our previous efforts by using statistical models and
algorithms. More specifically, we have used Latent Dirchlet Allocation: a
hierarchical probabilistic generative model that can be used to represent a
collection of documents by topics (Blei et al., 2003) to analyze Picasso's
poetry. Our analysis demonstrates that topic modeling can highlight patterns
and trends in Picasso's poetry that escape other forms of traditional analysis.

We will elaborate on the details of our current analysis using three points.
First, it is safe to assume that all poets limit themselves to a number of
representational topics as they compose their poems. We know that the European
conflict, the crisis in Picasso's own personal relations and the immediate
objects in his surroundings constituted the backdrop of many of his
compositions. In this respect, topic modeling has allowed us to more precisely
delimit the lexical manifestation of these themes, enabling us to see
interrelations between words within particular topics.

Secondly, topic modeling has allowed us to see correlations between concrete
themes as identified by certain lexical terms and different languages. These
correlations are particularly interesting in the case

of a bilingual poet like Picasso. For example, psychological concepts-madness,
for example- are often handled in French; while more physical references to his
immediate surroundings are circumscribed to Spanish terms. However, in cases
where both languages are used to communicate a similar concept, Picasso chooses
Spanish when he intends to apply a more folkloric tone. Using the English
lexical list of terms, we were able to highlight and identify the
interconnections between his poems in different languages.

Finally, we have determined that, in Picasso's poems, certain semantic domains
are predominant in each of the two languages he used - Spanish and French. For
instance, Picasso is more inclined to refer to food items and everyday objects
in his Spanish poems, which thus provides a clear reflection of his physical
environment and of the harsh economic situation of this time. On the other
hand, his French poems concentrate on more abstract concepts
involving politics, religion and sexuality, which may be attributed to the
influence of French Surrealist writers.

To summarize, in this paper we propose to analyze the ways in which concepts in
Picasso's poems and plays cluster into semantic categories; and in turn, how
these categories interact with other concepts within a complex semantic
network. Furthermore, through the use of statistical models we have been able
to identify and pinpoint representative themes and correlations across
different languages. Although topic modeling can point us to patterns
and interconnections within Picasso's writings, accurately characterizing the
nature of these relationships remains a challenge.

