A Framework for Historical Russian Flu Epidemic Exploration from
German Newspapers

Tran Van Canh

ctran@l3s.de

L3S Research Center, Hannover, Germany

Katja Markert

markert@cl.uni-heidelberg.de

Heidelberg University, Germany

Wolfgang Nejdl

nejdl@l3s.de

L3S Research Center, Hannover, Germany

Introduction

The Russian flu 1889-1893 epidemic reached Europe from the East in November and
December of 1889 and spread over the whole globe in the space of a few months.
It was one of the first epidemics of influenza that occurred during the period
of the rapid development of bacteriology. In addition, it was the first ever
epidemic that was publicly and intensively narrated in the developing daily
press, especially those

published in German located in Germany and Austria

(Miroslawska et al., 2013). However, as stated in (Valtat et al., 2011), very
limited information about the epidemiology of this influenza has been found,
which was based on materials published in English. While a large amount of news
about the flu was published in German, it is hard to find a study on the
epidemic based on German documents. These motivate our goal in this work, which
is to build a framework from German materials to support research community
getting more insights into the disease. Our framework consists of different
components including data collection and cleaning, corpus creation, and
associated tools for analysis. The framework is pictorially shown in Figure 1.

[048-1]

Figure 1. Russian flu exploration framework

Related work

There is limited information about the epidemiology of the Russian flu epidemic
1889-1893. In (Miroslawska et al., 2013), the authors conducted an analysis to
examine the impact of the epidemic in 14 cities in Europe. Their results showed
that the epidemic spread quickly from Saint Petersburg, Russia to other parts
of Europe with a speed of around 400 km/week and reached the American continent
only 70 days after the original peak in Saint Petersburg. In addition, some
detailed information about case fatality ratio and the median basic
reproduction was given also. However, their work was based on reports of
only two local daily newspapers in Poznan, which implies some uncertainty due
to the lack of data coverage. Val-leron et al., 2010 presented a case study on
the trans-missibility and geographic spread of the Russian flu. A similar
approach was followed by Valtat et al., 2011 to examine the age distribution of
the affected people and the mortality rate of this flu event. In a
recent study, Ewing et al., 2016 collected contemporary reports and explored a
digital humanities approach to interpret information dissemination regarding
this particular epidemic. The limitations common to all of these studies are
the heterogeneity and lack of coverage of data used.

Table 1: Keywords used to collect high recall collection of newspaper issues
containing stories about influenza epidemic


Data preparation

┌──┬──────────────────┬────────────────────┐
│ID│Keyword           │Variation           │
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│1 │Influenza         │Influenza Jnsolvenza│
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│2 │Epidemie          │                    │
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│3 │Influenza-Epidemie│Influenzaepidemie   │
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│4 │Grippe            │                    │
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│5 │erkrankt          │ertrankt            │
├──┼──────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│6 │Pathologie        │                    │
└──┴──────────────────┴────────────────────┘

Data collection

Data used in this work was collected from the Austrian Newspapers Online (ANNO)
repository. ANNO contains almost all issues from many newspapers in Austria and
Germany during the time the Russian flu epidemic took place. The data are
accessible in both scanned PDF and OCR formats. These are appropriate for our
goal in terms of extracting Russian flu related stories from noisy OCR text and
checking against the scanned PDF content for validity. To establish the
data collection, the keywords listed in Table 1 (along with some misspelt
variations of keywords, which were included due to OCR misrecognition) were
used to search the ANNO repository The search query was constrained by the time
interval from 1889 to 1893. After preprocessing the search results we
obtained 4,806 issues, which become the candidates to extract stories about the
Russian flu.

Noise reduction

Due to the low quality of the scanned images of newspaper issues, a lot of
noise is present in the corresponding OCR texts. The word error rate (WER)
 computed on sample texts is around 18.9%. Our goals here were to remove noise
and correct misrecognized words as much as possible but at the same time manage
keep the language as it was so that the derived corpus pertains its historical
perspective. It is noted that modern German is rather different in writing and
usage of many words due to the language's evolution. To cope with these issues,
we adopted a snapshot of the Google-2-gram dataset for German from 1885 to
1895. The dataset was used to train our bigram-based model for word
segmentation and spell checking. After running the model, the word error rate
was reduced to 5.5%.

Text block classification

A difficult challenge for the task of extracting complete stories is that
recognized OCR text blocks are very often not aligned in the same order as they
were in the original image of an issue. Our approach was to automatically
pre-classify OCR text blocks to identify the ones that are more likely part of
some flu-related stories. Then we developed a tool to effectively
help annotators extract complete Russian flu stories. For this, we adopted the
KL-divergence based technique developed in (Schneider, 2004) to build a
classifier. The model was trained with 245 OCR text paragraphs and obtained
recall of 81.5% and precision of 68.6%. Basically, the output of the classifier
can be used to help annotators start working on an issue by looking at
suggested text blocks first, from which they can then select paragraphs that
are part of the same story.

Extraction tool

After completing the high-recall automatic pre-extraction, we implemented a
Web-based tool for annotators to help build our corpus collaboratively. The
main GUI of our tool is shown in Figure 2. After having annotators work through
the whole collection, we obtained a corpus of 639 news articles about Russian
flu from 42 newspapers, identified with 85.7% agreement between annotators.

[048-2]

Figure 2. Main GUI of our tool for Russian flu story extraction

Geo and temporal information extraction

Given that location and time are helpful features for exploring the development
of the epidemic, we extracted and normalized geographic names and temporal
expressions occurring in the corpus. For geographic names, the Geodict tool
created by Pete Warden (2011) was adapted to work with country and city names
in German. HeidelTime (Strotgen and Gertz, 2013) was used for temporal
information extraction and normalization.

Indexing and search engine

We created a search engine on the corpus to support research community in
searching for information. The searching GUI is shown in Figure 3.

[048-3]

Searching results:

There are 77 stories found!

1    Extracted from newspaper issue: APR 10-12-1889 by annotator: admin

Telegramme der.presse". Prag, 9. December. In Folge eines speciellenFalles, daß
einGemeinde-Amt die Annahme einer in ungarischer Sprache abgefaßten
Eingabeverweigerte,gabder Statthalter von Mähren einen Erlaß hinaus, wonach
sämmt sämmtliche liehe sämmtliche autonomen Behörden die Eing...

2    Extracted from newspaper issue: APR 12-12-1889 by annotator: admin

Lieber Me Infiueiya. Wien, 11. December. Ein hiesiger Arzt, der an
derjnfluenza" erkranktwar, aber nach kaum viertägiger Krankheit vollkommen
genesenist, beschreibt uns den Verlauf der Krankheit, den er an sich
selbst beobachtet hat, wie folgt: Bevor die Krankheit zum Ausbruch gekommen
war, ist ein...

Figure 3. Russian flu story searching module

Exploration tools and sample results

We provided associated tools along with the corpus. The corpus timeline
provides statistics on the number of stories in the corpus across time and
news outlet. In addition, it provides interactive visualization. As an example
shown in Figure 4, during the peak time in late December 1889 and January 1890,
extensive news about the influenza was published.

[048-4]

Figure 4. Press attention on the flu and topic changes over time

Newspapers were trying to narrate the outbreak as fast as possible. Words that
appear significantly in the stories include influenza, epidemic, krankheit
(disease) and erkrankt (sick). A short time after this peak period, fewer
reports were published about the outbreak of the flu and communities started
discussing the treatment more. Names of doctors appearing in the news (e.g.,
Leyden, Proust) together with words describing symptoms such as fieber (fever),
kopfschmerzen (headache), appetitlosigkeit (anorexia). Furthermore, by
exploring word collocations one can find even more interesting information.
Figure 5 shows a frequent pattern of word collocation describing the influenza.
The words heute (today) and gestern (yesterday) indicate that news about the
flu is updated every day; and the word janner (January) implies that the flu
outbreaks happened during winter.

[048-5]

Figure 5: A frequent pattern of word collocation extracted from our corpus

Figure 6 presents the co-occurrences of three words infuenza, erkrankt, and
london over time. It shows a similar trending pattern of the words infuenza
and erkrankt being used to note about the flu. In addition, one can observe
that the peak time of the flu in London was from late December 1889 to early
January 1890 as indicated in (Honigsbaum, 2010; Goff, 2011). This suggests that
the temporal distribution of terms can give us more insights into the evolution
of the epidemic.

[048-6]

Figure 6: Similar trending pattern of the two words influenza and erkrankt, and
the peak time of the flu in London

The framework also supports studying the evolution of the flu over time and
geographic regions. We employed the method introduced in (Abdelhaq et
al., 2013) for localized event detection. Figure 7 shows three snapshots
describing the development of the epidemic over cities in Europe during the
peak time from late November 1889 to January 1890.

Summary


We have introduced a framework for research communities to explore the
historical Russian flu 1889-


1893 from German newspapers. We developed a tool for collaborative annotators
to help build our corpus. We further presented some interesting insights
that we achieved from analyzing articles in the corpus. By making the corpus
and associated tools available, we provide useful contributions to the
community in support of conducting studies on influenza epidemics
and evaluating temporal IR models.

[048-7]

Figure 7. Evolution of the Russian flu over geographic regions during its peak
time

Acknowledgements

This research is supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) for the
project “Tracking the Russian Flu in U.S. and German Medical and Popular
Reports, 1889-1893” on Grant No. NE 638/13-1. We also thank you the Austrian
National Library for supporting us in collecting data.

