Mapping concepts and authors from 20th century Portuguese magazines of ideas
and culture

Joana Malta

joanavmalta@gmail.com

Seminario Livre de Historia das Ideias

Universidade NOVA de Lisbon, Portugal

Pedro Lisboa

plisboa@gmail.com

Seminario Livre de Historia das Ideias

Universidade NOVA de Lisbon, Portugal

Magazines of ideas and culture constitute a very unique and exceptional set of
sources, whose richness comes from an ample participation of intellectuals and
artists, including some of the most influential individuals of their time. The
fact that Fernando Pessoa first published most of his work in these periodicals
clearly illustrates their importance (Andrade, 2003). These authors' prolonged
participation, over issues published during long periods of time, allows us to
capture and understand the movement of ideas and the diversity of their voices,
in a continuous process of debate and update.

The periodical press played a very strong historical role in France (e.g.,
Charle, 2004; Pluet-Despatin

et al., 2002), Italy (Frigessi, 1979), the United States

(Tebbel and Zuckerman, 1991), and Brazil (Luca, 2011; Martins, 2012), to
mention a few examples. The history of magazines in Brazil is particularly
interesting to us, due to the very direct relationship between Brazilian and
Portuguese intellectuals, who often wrote in the same publications (Guimaraes
et al., 2013).

In Portugal, all prominent intellectual movements used the periodical press,
and specifically magazines, as a place of reunion, where they
shared, discussed, and made their ideas public. In the first half of the 20^th
century the diversity of published magazines was as ample as the diversity of
artistic, cultural, intellectual, and political movements. Magazines were used
not only to reach other intellectuals but also a wider audience, with a
commitment to establish a strong and informed public opinion, in search of what
many contemporary authors believed to be “a universal rationality present in
every person” (Andrade, 1999: 31, translation ours). The press was, among other
things, a territory of political struggle and intervention.

For almost two decades now, the research group Free Seminar of History of Ideas
(Seminario Livre de Historia das Ideias, n.d.) has been working on building a
comprehensive and extensive database of some of the most important 20^th
century Portuguese magazines of ideas and culture. The project Magazines
of Ideas and Culture (Seminario Livre de Historia das Ideias, Revistas de
Ideias e Cultura, n.d.) has taken a multidisciplinary approach from the very
beginning, encompassing knowledge from fields such as history of ideas, library
science, and information science. Its aim was to build a relational database
containing exhaustive information on authorship, quoted authors and works,
subjects, concepts, and geographical names, for all articles contained in these
publications.

One of the main methodological aspects of the project was the segmentation of
the traditional “keywords” field in two: subjects and concepts. The keyword was
deemed a too insufficient and imprecise instrument for obtaining a
comprehensive understanding of the underlining ideas and ideological frameworks
contained in these magazines.

To avoid the use of divergent criteria in establishing what could be considered
a concept, a conceptual thesaurus, for use by researchers, was discussed
and developed by the team beforehand. The first step in this process was to
reach a consensual definition of the two relevant operative fields; in very
broad terms, a concept was considered abstract, whereas a subject was deemed
the materialization of an idea (e.g., Koselleck, 2004; Skinner, 2005 and
Castro, 1996: 11-21, for a somewhat different theoretical approach). For
example, in an article containing the concept “war,” acceptable accompanying
subjects -limited by actual article contents, of course - are any and all
specific armed conflicts, as well as all the thoughts and ideas that can be
produced on “war.” We seek to determine concepts from a comprehensive, rather
than explanatory, perspective. This means that, in any given article, all
structuring concepts mobilized by the author, in accordance with the conceptual
economy underlying the discourse, are relevant and thus collected.

Utilizing a conceptual framework also makes it possible to record the use of a
concept without a verbatim textual mention of the word (Lisboa, 2015: 133-145).
The need for a critical understanding of the texts made the use of tools for
text recognition (OCR) inadequate. As such, all the input information is
collected and validated by researchers.

The definition of the conceptual thesaurus followed principles of parsimony,
consistency, and clarity, avoiding redundancies and repetitions, while at the
same time favouring common criteria and language comprehensibility for all
users:

“While making no claim to absolute denotation or universality, and agreeing
with the fundamentally subjective use of concepts, we believe that the use of a
large number of concepts is in fact ubiquitous, in parallel with the difference
between language and speech. However, notwithstanding the differences between
language and the uses of language, we must be able to achieve some level of
systematization, as found in most dictionaries and similar works of reference.”

The resulting conceptual network constitutes one of the strongest virtues of
the project, allowing for a clear delimitation of the general and specific
terms that structured thought as a representation of the world, a phenomenon
which can be found in magazines of the same political, cultural, or artistic
movement. The set of reciprocal concepts in the conceptual map for each
movement will allow a clear understanding of the fundamental ideas and
thoughts that motivated their authors.

It should be noted that our project does not aim to classify information, but
rather to provide a comprehensive reading of the sources. Our output is meant
to be the result of a critical analysis of the source and an interpretation of
its contents, grounded in the fields of History of Ideas and Conceptual
History, and not a mere blind or neutral collection of terms and names. The
database is not intended to replace the source, but instead to aid navigation
through its complexity, providing meaning and structure to the included corpus
of discourses, and highlighting the underlying programmatic and doctrinarian
aspect of these magazines.

Our presentation proposal focuses on the magazine A Águia, a monthly magazine
of literature, art, science, philosophy, and social critique, as stated in

the subtitle, published between 1910 and 1932. This

was the main organ of the republican Renascenfa Portuguesa, one of the most
noteworthy intellectual movements of 20^th century Portuguese history. For its
205 issues, published over the five series that make up the magazine's complete
collection, 1,903 articles were indexed, and the collected data includes 403
single authors, 4,299 quoted names, and 1,033 concepts, among other
descriptors.

We will apply network analysis to our data (Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Scott,
2000; Carrington, Scott and Wasserman, 2005), and intend to focus on the most
important authors, i.e., those that have written the most articles for A Águia.
Connecting individual article authors with the authors quoted in their texts
should provide a visual map of intellectual networks, highlighting influences
between authors and their ideas, thoughts, and intellectual background. Using
information on quoted names will bring to light the shared and individual
references of these authors, providing a visual network of the most influential
names featured in their participation in the magazine.

We also intend to trace conceptual networks for a few selected authors. By
observing the interaction of concepts used by a given author during a long
period of time, an illustration of the course and evolution of their thoughts
and ideas will hopefully manifest. In addition, observing the connections
between concepts used by different authors (which concepts are used
simultaneously more often, for example) can highlight profound or subtle
differences in their intellectual background. Finally, confronting the
two stages of our analysis - quoted authors and concepts - will provide a clear
and vivid image of each author's views and discourse.

We believe that quantitative analysis of qualitative information can be a very
powerful instrument if there is a strong consistency in the information being
analysed. It can bring to light new relationships between authors, conceptual
frameworks, or even conceptual transitions within a single author. Shifting
from a narrative of intellectual dialogue to a visual movement of thought and
ideas can be a powerful tool for obtaining an original and comprehensive image
of the structures of thought underlying the intellectual production of a given
period, through a particularly significant medium, i.e., magazines.

The tool developed by our research group “is an invitation for the reader to
remember that knowledge is, foremost, an exercise of imagination, since the
universe of questionable content and the scope of viable answers are both
meticulously expanded.” (Andrade, n.d.)

