Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis: Approaching the Progressive Structuration
of Literary Texts

Frank Fischer

frafis@gmail.com

National Research University

Higher School of Economics

Russia

Mathias Gobel

goebel@sub.uni-goettingen.de

Gottingen State and University Library, Germany

Dario Kampkaspar

kampkaspar@hab.de

Herzog August Library, Germany

Christopher Kittel

contact@christopherkittel.eu

University of Graz, Austria

Peer Trilcke

trilcke@uni-potsdam.de

University of Potsdam, Germany

Introduction and related works

In recent years, the application of network analysis methods to literary texts
has evolved into an independent research field of digital literary studies.
Methods for the automated extraction of network data (named entity recognition,
co-reference resolution) and their evaluation are of particular importance
(El-son et al. 2010; Park et al. 2013; Agrarwal et al. 2013; Fischer et al.
2015; Waumans et al. 2015; Jannidis et al. 2016). Based on the data obtained,
several types of analyses were developed: an empirical, quantitative and
hierarchical description of literary characters (Jannidis et al. 2016),
corpus-based analyses exploring options for historical periodisation of
literature (Trilcke et al. 2015) and types of aesthetic modelling of social
formations in and by literary texts (Stiller et al. 2003; Stiller & Hudson
2005; Trilcke et al. 2016).

What has been neglected so far (although already suggested by Moretti 2011) is
the application of network analysis as a tool for quantitative plot
analysis. In fact, current approaches in the field of literary network analysis
are not suited to gaining insights into the plot development of literary texts
(Prado et al. 2016). The sequential dimension of literary texts, as
a consequence of their temporality, usually remains in the dark: what is
extracted, visualised and analysed

are static networks. Plot, however, is essentially a concept supposed to
theoretically encompass the temporality of narrative (as well as dramatic)
texts: "the repeated attempts to redefine parameters of plot reflect both the
centrality and the complexity of the temporal dimension of narrative"
(Dannenberg 2005: pp. 435). Plot can be understood as a concept for the
description of the "progressive structuration" (Kukkonen 2013: §4) of literary
texts.

Research objective: plot analysis

Attempts to further develop literary network analysis towards a quantitative
plot analysis must consider the temporal dimension in the modelling of their
research objects. The structure of a literary text is to be modelled as a
changing sequence of network states. It is only through looking into these
network dynamics that we can discuss network-analytic approaches for
a quantitative plot analysis.

Following Prado et al. 2016, we are currently extending our research on
literary networks (Trilcke 2013; Fischer et al. 2015ff.; Fischer et al. 2015;
Trilcke et al. 2016) to the analysis of progressive structuration. Our goal is
to examine whether (and with what kind of limitations) we can flesh out an
operationalisation for the plot analysis of literary texts. By doing so, we
are, of course, not trying to replace the semantically rich and versatile
concept of 'plot' with a quantitative and thus reductionist concept. Rather, we
will show that certain aspects of what is commonly discussed within the
framework of plot analysis can be retraced by means of a computer-based
analysis of network dynamics.

The visualisation of dynamic graphs, as is common in other domains (Pohl et al.
2008; Frederico et al. 2011), has recently been transferred to literary
networks (Xanthos et al. 2016). While it may come in useful when close-reading
a text and for didactic purposes, it is unsatisfactory when it comes to an
actual corpus-based analysis. There are no canonical methods to help us compare
network visualisations generated automatically by force-directed graph drawing
algorithms. The reception of dynamic visualisations just does not offer
practical analytical means. From a dedicated distant-reading kind of
perspective, the calculation of dynamic network metrics and their
statistical processing is much more promising as it offers options to describe
general characteristics of networks from a larger corpus as well as to compare
specific formal types of networks within the corpus.

Measuring dynamic literary networks

A number of basic global measures for the analysis of dynamic networks (i.e.,
size, density, homogeneity in the distribution of ties, rate of changes in
nodes, rate

of changes in ties) has been discussed by Carley (2003:

pp. 135-36). In addition, Prado et al. 2016 recently suggested the application
of actor-oriented measures, especially centrality indices, for the
reconstruction of plot development. We are currently applying these measures to
our own corpus, consisting of 465 German language plays. We also developed a
set of other measures with recourse to traditional theoretical concepts for the
description of specific phenomena of plot development, especially with regard
to types of dramatic expositions (Pfister 1977: pp. 124-36), the "classical"
act structure of tragedy and the composition principle of main and secondary
plots (Pfister 1977: pp. 286-89). Calculation of these measures was implemented
in our own network analysis tool drama-vis (Kittel/Fischer 2017).

Event-based measures

In general, two types of measures can be distinguished for describing dramatic
texts as dynamic networks: event-based and progression-based measures.
Event-based measures are used to identify or characterise a particular point in
time within a drama. In this context we developed an all-in index, a value that
identifies the point in time at which all characters have occurred at least
once in a drama (see Figure 1).

[071-1]

Figure 1 : All-in index for 6 selected plays


The final-scene-size value characterises a specific point in time, in this case
the last scene of a drama. It determines the percentage of all characters of
a drama which appear on stage in the last scene. This value shows
characteristic differences between dramatic subgenres, especially when
comparing tragedies and comedies (see Figure 2).

[071-2]

Figure 2: Final-scene-size index (mean values of entire corpus and subgenres)

Progression-based measures

While event-based measures allow assumptions about a particular state/point in
time of the dynamic network, progression-based measures allow a
general characterisation of the transformation of a dramatic network. In this
regard, we introduced a measure we call the drama-change rate. The basis of our
calculation is a modified Levenshtein distance, which only takes into account
insertions ("add character") and deletions ("delete character"). In each case,
we compare characters present in two consecutive scenes, eventually resulting
in what we call the segment-change rate (Figure 3).

Scene 1    2    3    4    Scene 12    3

[071-3]

segment change rate    segment change rate

» 1/2 = 0.5    =2/3 = 0.66

Figure 3: Calculation of the segment-change rate (example)


BI


The sum of all segment-change rates of a drama divided by the number of all 
segment-change rates is what we call the drama-change rate. The development of
this rate can be represented in a chart, which due to its shape we tentatively
called the beat chart (Figure 4).

[071-4]

Figure 4: Beat chart for Goethe's play "Iphigenie auf Tauris" (1787)

Having calculated the drama-change-rate value for the entire corpus, we can
start to compare a larger set of dramas with each other (Figure 5). It becomes
evident that our corpus does not exhibit a clear trend along the timeline.
Instead, we witness the emergence of characteristic types of dramas, which
differ characteristically from the other texts in our corpus.

[071-5]

Figure 5: Historical distribution of drama-change rates in the DLINA corpus

On the one hand, we can identify dramas exhibiting a

high drama-change rate, i.e., highly dynamic dramas with a constant alternation
of characters on stage (Figure 6). On the other hand, low-dynamic dramas can be

[071-6]

Figure 6: Two examples of highly dynamic dramas - left: Goethe's "Egmont"
(1788); right: Lenz's "Der Hofmeister" (1774)

[071-7]

Figure 7: Two Examples for low-dynamic dramas - left: Goethe's "Der
Burgergeneral" (1793), right: Rilke's "Ohne Gegenwart" (1898)

A further option for the comparative analysis of our oscillatory beat charts is
the analysis of the standard deviation of all segment-change rates of a drama.
We can again distinguish two particularly striking types: On the one hand,
there are dramas with a high standard deviation, indicating that extensive
changes of characters alternate with small changes; we can call them
high-dynamic dramas (Figure 8). On the other hand, there are dramas showing a
low standard deviation, so the change on stage takes place in the same rhythm,
we call these texts low-dynamic dramas (Fig-

[071-8]

Figure 8: Two Examples for high-dynamic dramas - left: Benkowitz's "Die
Jubelfeier der Hölle" (1801), right: Goethe's "Faust I" (1808)

[071-9]

Figure 9: Two Examples for low-dynamic dramas - left: Schnitzler's "Anatol"
(1893), right: Schnitzler's "Der Reigen" (1902)

The preceding cases each describe characteristic deviations regarding the 
drama-change rate of groups of texts. In addition, a 'normal type' of drama can
be identified, which corresponds to the mean value for the corpus both in terms
of arithmetic mean and standard deviation (Figure 10).

[071-10]

Figure 10: Beat chart for Ganghofer's "Der Herrgottschnitzer von Ammergau"
(1880)

It also appears that strong upward shifts, accompanied by a complete exchange
of characters on stage, often coincide with act boundaries (vertical orange
lines), which is in accordance with historical conventions of dramatic
composition.

Summary and further research

Our research on dynamic networks provides basic components for a quantitative
analysis of the progressive structuration of dramatic texts. Future
research will have to develop and evaluate additional measures and it will be
decisive to hold interpretations of these measures against the backdrop of
historical drama poetics.

