1947 Partition on the

Margins: The Untold

Testimonies of Sikh,

Bahawalpur and Marwari Communities

Shaifali Arora

arora.shaifali16@gmail.com

School of Humanities and Social Sciences

Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India

Nirmala Menon

nmenon@iiti.ac.in

School of Humanities and Social Sciences,

Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India

This poster offers a concise working plan of a digital project titled 1947
Partition on the Margins: The Untold Testimonies of Sikh, Bahawalpur
and Marwari Communities. The project aims to collect undocumented narratives of
many ‘Punjabi' and ‘Rajasthani' communities who migrated from villages in
current Eastern Pakistan to villages in the current Western India during the
1947 partition. The primary objective of the project is to create an
open access visual and narrative based digital archive of partition and
post-partition testimonies developed through audio-video transcripts and
photographs. The audio-visual transcripts will be collected through personal
interviews of the partition witnesses, their families and
subsequent generations. These interviews will take place on-site in their
villages. This population mostly consists of Sikh, Bahawalpur and Marwari
communities who travelled comparatively short distances during partition,
settling in the nearby villages close to the border in Indian states of
Rajasthan and Punjab. The geographical distance travelled by these communities
towards Indian villages was only about 40 to 50 KM. However, the spatial
definitions changed and any hope of revisiting the ancestral homeland was
shattered with the newly constructed international border.

These are a few minority communities residing in small villages whose partition
experiences are not traced in public memory or documented in any literature,
primarily because their journey of migration was relatively hushed and
non-violent. However, the geo-political movement from one place to another
brought larger social, cultural, political and economic challenges in the
post-independence

India for families in these many communities. They migrated from one small
village to another leaving behind whatever geographical, economical
and cultural assets that belonged to them. Even after almost 70 years of
partition in 1947, families in these communities are struggling to own lands of
their own. The generation that witnessed the partition of 1947 is disappearing
and will not be there after next 4 to 5 years. Therefore, it becomes an
obligatory task to document the narratives of a traumatic historical event that
completely changed the flow of history.

The subsequent generations of these families who migrated to India continue to
face economic and cultural challenges. The nostalgia of not being able to visit
their ancestral homeland disturbs the process of connecting with their current
homeland. Therefore, this project aims to contextualise these first-hand
audio-video interviews and photographs into narratives that will provide an
influential palimpsest of history and the contemporary cultural and political
state.

There are several ongoing digital projects that contextualise historical events
into narratives such as 1947 Partition Archive, 1984 Living History, Kashmir
Oral History, Indian Memory Project and Holocaust Memorial Museum. The memory
projects on the 1947 partition such as 1947 Partition Archive mostly record
stories that are often (rightly so) narratives of violence and bloodshed.
However, there is gap in existing literature and database that do not document
less violent partition experiences of a large population that mostly live at
the western Indian border. The aim of the current project is to document those
unheard communities which escaped immediate violence but continue to suffer the
residual pains of geo-cultural and economical traumas in post-partition India.
The poster also offers a framework of methodology to be followed for developing
the project. The methodology involves collection of data by visiting the
villages, audio-video interviews with families, collecting photographs and
letters, transcription and description of interviews and
contextualising photographs and letters in narratives. The development of final
testimonies achieved through these working stages will be developed into an
open access website, hosted through KSHIP (Knowledge Sharing In Publication)
which is a multilingual academic publishing project at IIT (Indian Institute of
Technology) Indore, India.

