Developing a Database For Scholarship In Indian Languages And Literatures

Shanmugapriya T

phd1501161005@iiti.ac.in

Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India

India is a multilingual country which has twenty-

two official languages and eleven written scripts, according to the 8^th
schedule to the Constitution of India. Each language has its own literature and
scholarship. In the digital space, both the dissemination of and access to
scholarly articles of Indian languages and literatures are difficult and rare.
The main objective of this project is to offer scholarly publications and
access to scholarly articles in languages other than English. There are some
scholarly articles available in print, but most of them give citation of the
works that is insufficient for research scholars. There are some databases
available for scholarship in India such as Shodhganga: a reservoir of Indian
Theses and National Digital Library. Shodhganga offers the scholarly
communities to access ETD (Electronic Thesis and Dissertation) in English. 
National Digital Library is a digital repository which provides learning
resources for various subjects with single-window search of which the interface
is available in three languages English, Hindi and Bangla. Similarly, there are
some databases for digitized literary manuscripts of Indian languages:
for instance, Project Madurai for the Tamil language, etc. However, there is no
comprehensive digital database for scholarship in Indian languages and
literatures.

This database project envisages digital ecology as an integral part of
knowledge production and dissemination. In India, Digital Humanities in
literature, apart from notable exceptions like “Bichitra”, there is little in
terms of digitization of scholarship from many language literatures. Our
database will serve as a collaborative and comprehensive hub for Indian
literature scholarship. We plan to make this database after its initial launch
to be crowd sourced by enabling Indian literature departments across
universities to use it as a platform for disseminating their scholarship.

The poster presents the initial stage of aggregating metadata of literature and
scholarly articles in different languages. We have already collected data for
Mal-ayalam, North-East, Sindhi and collecting data for Bengali, Hindi and Tamil
is underway. This will be extended to other Indian languages.

The collection of data is:

•    Malayalam-25800

•    North-East-1494

•    Sindhi- 8813

We will use the MLA International Bibliography, Shodhganga and National Digital
Library as models for our project to develop a database of literature
and scholarly articles in Indian languages. One of the primary objectives of
the project is to offer the works through an open-access platform which allows
access to the researchers across the country. Hence, it will be made
open-access through KSHIP (Knowledge Sharing In Publication) which is a
multilingual academic publishing project at IIT (Indian Institute of
Technology) Indore, India. The database will be developed in different Indian
languages, which presents an opportunity to researchers to explore the database
in their own respective languages. Collecting data for the database has already
been initiated, and the next stage of the project is to host it. The poster
presents an introduction to the project, the need for a multilingual
scholarly database, the primary objective of the project, different Indian
scripts, and our methodology, collected data, and model for access (open
access).

