Modelling a Prosopography for the Roman Republic The Digital Prosopography of
the Roman Republic Project

Luis Figueira

luis.figueira@kcl.ac.uk

King's Digital Lab

King's College London, United Kingdom

Miguel Vieira

jose.m.vieira@kcl.ac.uk

King's Digital Lab

King's College London, United Kingdom

In this abstract we describe the development of a web application for a
prosopography of the Roman Republic, focusing on the data modelling, data
harvesting and user interface. The web application offers finegrained data
about the elite of the Roman Republic, allowing the detailed study of its
attested individuals, including familial composition, office-holding
patterns, internal hierarchies, property and wealth.

The Digital Prosopography of the Roman Republic

(DPRR) is an AHRC (Arts and Humanities Research Council) funded project,
running from 2013 to May 2017. It is a collaborative project being developed
by King's Digital Lab, together with the Classics and the Digital Humanities
Departments from King's College London.

The project was developed to allow users easy access to complex data to enable
them to answer questions such as:

•    list the individuals who were praetors between 200-100 BCE with nomen
Caecilius;

•    list proconsuls in Gallia between 100-80 BCE;

•    show all persons who were both consul and pontifex between 123 and 100 BCE
(i.e. consuls who were also pontifices);

•    visualise the composition of the the senate in the year 100 BCE;

• persons with a birth date and a death date between 250-100 BCE;

• women that died of violent death.

To preserve the richness of the data, while allowing answering research
questions as above, the DPRR data model was designed to store the
prosopographical data using the principles of the Factoid Model (Bradley and
Short, 2002; Pasin and Bradley, 2012). This builds upon previous experience
acquired developing similar projects (Prosopography of the Byzantine
Empire, Clergy of Anglo-Saxon England Database, Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon
England, Prosopography of the Byzantine World, People of Medieval Scotland,
Making of Charlemagne's Europe).

The data model is organised around four main entities: Person, PostAssertion, 
StatusAssertion and RelationshipAssertion. The main entity, Person, stores
information about each individual, such as names, gender, life dates, patrician
indicator, etc. The PostAssertion entity stores data related to offices/posts
held by individuals (such as praetor, consul, legate, etc), while the 
StatusAssertion stores senatorial and equestrian class information. The 
RelationshipAssertion represents personal relationships (brother of, son of,
etc), connecting two different individuals within the database. All these
entities are linked, as represented in Figure 1. All Assertion models are
linked to a SecondarySource entity with details about the
bibliographical references supporting the data.

[091-1]

Figure 1 - Simplified database model

The data for the project has been harvested from

multiple sources - mainly from Broughton's Magistrates of the Roman Republic
(1951-86), Ruepke's Fasti Sacerdotum (2005) and Zmeskal's Adfinitas (2009). The
data was automatically loaded using scripts developed for each source (Fig. 2).
There's also a data editing interface, which was mostly used to make
corrections to the automatically loaded data, as well as adding new information
when needed.

[091-2]

Figure 2 - Data workflow

Besides loading and entering data directly into the database, the project also
has rules to infer new information about personal relationships and senators.
An example is, the application creates a Senator object for a person that held
a specific post in a given year, such as consul, praetor, aedile, tribunus
plebis, censor, princeps senatus.

The database, which stores all this information in

an easily searchable format, is fronted by a web application (see the public
version of the website). This website allows the public to explore the data
using a faceted search interface with different filters that can be applied.
This guides the user to achieve answers to the research questions above. By
selecting individual results, it is possible to see all the information about
a person, including visualisations of their relationship networks (Fig. 3).

Visualisations of the senate composition on a yearly basis are also being
created. We are currently working towards integrating the database with
Linked Data technologies as part of the Standard for Networking Ancient
Prosopographies (see the SNAP:DRGN pro^ject).

The project is built using open source tools and technologies, mainly the
Django application framework with a PostgreSQL database. The search interface
is implemented using the Solr search engine together with the django-haystack
search package for Django. The visualisations are created with d3plus and 
linkurious. The project source code is also available as open source in a 
GitHub repository.

Our poster will illustrate the model that supports this digital resource, the
methods used to retrieve the data and populate it, as well its usage for data
exploration and visualisation.

