Collecting the Name of a

Historical Person from

Related Historical Material

Taizo Yamada

t_yamada@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo, Japan

Satoshi Inoue

inoue@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo, Japan

This proposal describes a method of collecting and managing the name of a
person from historical materials related to Japanese history from the 8th
century until the 19th century.

There are several tasks related to personal name such as collecting,
identifying, representing. For historians and researchers, the recording and
management of a personal name is an integral (and unavoidable) task. In Japan,
historical materials are held by both a public institute and a private house in
which they are found. Because there are no catalogs listing all of
the material, the research staff at our institute (the Historiographical
Institute of the University of Tokyo) spend several weeks each year
investigating and examining historical records kept in Japan and abroad. The
staff has over 100 years' combined experience conducting these examinations,
and their journeys have taken them all over Japan as well as to many different
parts of the globe. Ho (2015) and Bol et al (2015) introduced a method of
personal name management in the context of Chinese historical materials (like
a    (difang-

zhi)") that used the China Biographical Database (CBCB) as a biographical
dictionary. In Japanese history, there is no such exhaustive encyclopedia or
dictionary for a name of a historical person.

A personal name appears in a variety of historical materials such as an old
diary, an old document, a classical book, a family pedigree, a document related
to appointment, and so on. The materials contain diverse name representations,
such as a real name or an original name, a nickname, an epithet, a role name
which indicates a person, and a Kao (which is a stylized signature or a mark),
among others.

We constructed a repository which can store a collection containing both the
names and the historical materials in which they appear. There are several
different representations of a name in each material type. In order to
represent and preserve these variations, the repository can store a variety of
name data regardless of differences in data schema. In order to
ensure efficient data-searching, we prepared common metadata that consist of an
identifier, a personal name, a correspondence of the name, a related resource,
a database where the name has been stored if such a database has already been
constructed and the date on which the name appeared in the resource.

The name data can be expressed as RDF data and searched with SPARQL in the
repository which provides an RDF store and a SPARQL endpoint. Furthermore, the
repository can integrate the name data regardless of differences among personal
name metadata schema, and provide the result of the integration. In addition,
we will show an application for representing the outcomes of search results.

