Towards a New Approach in the Study of Ancient Greek Music: The Virtual

Reconstruction of an Aulos

“Early Type” from Sicily

Angela Bellia

angela.bellia@unibo.it

University of Bologna, Italy

The ancient site of Selinunte (Sicily) is recognised today as one of the most
important archaeological sites of the Greek period in Italy. From its
foundation as a colony around the second half of the VII c. through to the
middle of the III c. BCE, Selinunte enjoyed a prosperous existence as reflected
in its notable sanctuaries, and temples. In 2006, the Institute of Fine Arts at
New York University began a research project on the acropolis under the
direction of Prof. C. Marconi and in collaboration with the Archaeological Park
of Selinunte. The project consists of a new, systematic and interdisciplinary
study of the archaeology and architecture of the main urban
sanctuary, beginning with its southern sector. In the years between 2006 and
2012, the survey also consisted of the investigation of the ‘South Building'.
This structure is notable for its prominent position within the sacred space.
From the time of its discovery (1876), its scale has attracted scholarly
attention, and the ‘South Building' has played a significant role in
discussions about the spatial articulation and cults of the main urban
sanctuary. The investigation included a systematic programme of documenting
the buildings in the area and its digital reconstruction.

Several elements suggest the identification of the ‘South Building' as an
impressive theatral viewing area with particular acoustic qualities (Marconi
and Scahill, 2015). This building belong to a group of the-atral structures
found in various regions of the Greek world. Many of these structures were not
proper “theatres”, but rather primitive rows of seats (meaning non-canonical
theatres, with linear and non-circular theatra and/or orchestra): they existed
as “a place from where one could watch”, which is in fact the original meaning
of the word theatron.

The quality of the stones was carefully selected in relation to their placement
in the cultic theatres,

based on structural, aesthetic, and, acoustic considerations. The acoustics of
the linear theatra in the Greek world have never been analysed (Blesser
and Salter, 2011): no study has focused on the acoustics of these theatres in
order to understand how and why these spaces were chosen for performance. It
is a category of buildings brought to the attention of scholarship by Anti
(1947), but first investigated in relation to religious contexts by Nielsen
(2002) in her study on cultic theatres in the ancient world; by Marconi (2013)
in his study on the theatral structure of Selinunte; and by Hollinshead (2015)
in her study on the steps as components of monumental construction at Greek
sites as early as the VI c. BCE.

At Selinunte, the cultic theatre was built to accommodate spectators of
performances associated primarily with Temple R, probably a temple of Demeter.
One of the main striking finds among the votive depositions was the discovery
of two parts of a bone aulos, which can be dated to 570 BCE (Marconi, 2014).
This discovery is very significant, particularly with regard to the performance
associated with the activity of Temple R (Marconi, 2013). The discovery shows
the importance of music in this context which already existed in the Early
Archaic period, that is, since its foundation.

In 2013, the Marie Curie Actions programme

(IOF) funded the TELESTES project (622974): the main aim of this project was
the reconstruction of musical development at Selinunte on the basis of material
culture and written sources. It also included the study of the aulos from
Temple R using a CT scan, an improved method for the visualisation and analysis
of the instruments (Bellia, 2015). However, this survey still lacked an
appropriate connection between the acoustics of the cultic theatre and
musical activity related to the building. Thanks to the present project,
auralisation techniques are used to explore the spatial dimension of sound in
this cultic theatre, establishing a relationship between the spatial
configuration of this structure and how this complements music. These data will
help us to understand the aural perception of ancient peoples and the type of
sound experiences they were exposed to.

This research is the first study on the virtual reconstruction of the acoustics
of cultic theatres of the Greek world. Despite their relevance to the field
of ancient music, no study has focused on the acoustics of these theatres in
order to understand how and why these spaces were chosen for
performance. Within this context, archaeoacoustics is being used as a new
method for the analysis of historical heritage, enabling the evaluation of the
sound quality of a space (Scarre and Graeme, 2006) by using auralisa-tion
techniques which allow cognitive and physical elements to be reproduced and
combined (Eneix, 2014).

This project offers an innovative research method in the study of ancient Greek
music, not only in its contextualisation of archaeological evidence, but also
by making connections between digital and acoustic techniques. It is also hoped
that the results will provide some foundations from which to
create interpretative reconstructions of what the cultic theatres might have
sounded like, using digital and acoustic technology. Moreover, this study will
contribute towards overcoming the traditional methods in measuring ancient
instruments, opening up a new disciplinary framework for the interaction
between 3D reconstruction of instruments, their respective sounds, and the
spaces of musical performances.

In order to analyse the acoustic characteristics of the cultic theatre of
Selinunte, an acoustic survey will be carried out using an impulsive sound
source located in two positions on the steps, and in the “orchestra”.
Measurements will be recorded using an impulsive sound source. This process
will make it possible to obtain a virtual acoustic reconstruction of this
space, including the incorporation of acoustic characteristics as another
important aspect of its intangible heritage. The software used will be
CATT-Acoustic, v. 9.0 c.

The digitisation process of the aulos is divided into two main tasks, namely
the 3D scanning phase and the post-processing phase. The tools we plan
to develop are divided into those involving the use of computational methods
for processing the 3D models, and those involving the development of
interactive tools aimed at engaging in the exploration of the instruments. The
software used will be GEOMAGIC

DESIGN X, with AVIZO, v. 9.0. Following the digital model will translated into
artificial copies, using polymer as a material. We aim to obtain and to
assess the auralisation of the acoustical properties of these 3D models.

In addition, the work will address the study of written sources as well as
visual and archaeological documentation related to music performed in
the cultic theatres of the ancient Greek world from the Archaic through to the
Classical periods. The study will be conducted in order to understand the
reasons that led ancient cultures to create these spaces, as well as
reconstruct how they experienced them.

Expected results

Firstly, this research will provide the first acoustic model for the study of
acoustical properties of cultic theatres in the ancient Greek world. The study
will assess and recover the acoustics of the Selinunte theatre.

Secondly, the research will develop specific tools suitable for processing the
resulting 3D models. It is also hoped that the results will provide some
foundations from which to create experimental interpretative 3D reconstructions
integrating acoustic models. The results will establish a new framework, which
future researchers can use to advance their knowledge of the application of 3D
technology for the documentation of instruments.

Finally, this project will offer an innovative research method in the study of
ancient Greek music. This research aims to create a field of
comparative studies of archaeomusicological research.

In conclusion, this research will develop a new theoretical basis, which will
contribute to the establishment of a methodology at the crossroads of
ar-chaeomusicology, architecture, and acoustics and digital technologies. In
addition, this study is part of a programme intended to valorise ancient
cultural and musical heritage in the Mediterranean with cross-disciplinary
approaches to human culture and technology, in order to unveil new meanings and
create new research fields within the digital humanities and heritage science.

