Accessing Russian Culture Online: The scope of digitisation in museums across
Russia

Melissa Terras

author.email@domain.com

University College London, United Kingdom

Inna Kizhner

inna.kizhner@gmail.com

Siberian Federal University, Russia

Maxim Rumyantsev

m-rumyantsev@yandex.ru

Siberian Federal University, Russia

Kristina Sycheva

kristina.sycheva.2012@mail.ru Siberian Federal University, Russia

Although the rate and coverage of digitization throughout Europe is monitored
and understood (Eu-ropeana, 2016; Minerva EC, 2016, Navarette 2015) there has
been little work done on understanding the reach of digitization across Russia.
In this paper, we build on previous work (Kizhner, Terras, Rumyantsev, 2016) by
using Russian Ministry of Culture statistics to calculate the percentage of
museum collections that have been digitized across Russia. We show
regional variations and demonstrate that although many Russian museums have
digitisation programs, this is not carried out to the same extent as across
Europe. We suggest that studying non-European digitization practices can lead
to further understanding of the digital canon upon which analysis of culture is
based (Limb, 2007; Warwick et al, 2008; Price, 2009; Earhart, 2012).

Digital visual collections from national and regional museums can be a rich
source of data for digital humanities but the first step in these studies might
be to discover the existence of digital images on national levels. Do
non-European digital collections exist? Do non-European museums provide the
same amount of data as European museums? Is this amount equal for the centre of
the country and for provinces? How many images are posted online?

This paper aims to find out the current scale of digitization in Russian
museums. We discuss Russian digitization as an example of real life messy
collection of data where the situation is hardly related to «postmodernist
utopia» (Sartori 2016) or the wishful thinking of moving images across
interfaces (Robinson, 2013; Kizhner, Stankevich, Terras, Rumyantsev 2016), all
of them quite distant perspectives.

Starting from the 1970s, the rationale for museum digitisation practices in
Russia was quite similar to that in many other countries. It was informed by
a need for information and collection management so that museum objects would
not be lost and were properly conserved (Navarette, 2014; Sher, 1983; Williams,
1987; Chenhall and Vance, 1987). Russian government policy related to that need
from 2008 onwards was aimed at building The National Catalogue of Museum
Objects posted online (Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation, 2016) and
currently including images for 1,2 million museum objects, 1,5% of total number
of Russian museum objects (slightly over 80 million), and 2% of the collection
of unique objects (about 60 million).

The National Catalogue is an initial access point in finding out the scale of
museum digitization in various parts of the country including its remote
regions. Our previous paper (Kizhner, Terras, Rumyantsev, 2016) demonstrated
preliminary results of a survey estimating the percentage of digital images for
Russian museum collections. The study also included web site exploration
results on the percentage of museum collections posted online. However, it only
covered 1,2% museums in the country for the percentage of digitized images and
6% for the images posted online and its results gave initial estimates.

The present paper studies the percentage of digital images through the
statistical reports submitted to the Ministry of Culture from 2,367 museums in
2015. The annual statistical reports are mandatory for all museums reporting to
local municipalities, regional administrations and the RF Ministry of Culture,
in fact for all non-private and non-corporate museums. We provide the average
results for the country and and the average results for its 8 major
geographical regions.

Methodology

The data of the RF museums' statistical reports for 2015 were received from the
RF Ministry of Culture in summer 2016. Museums return these mandatory reports
in January and provide statistical data for the preceding year. The data were
related to 2,635 museums from every region of the Russian Federation.

The data were received as an Excel spreadsheet from which the parts were
removed that were not related to the digitization of museum objects and
the data on galleries that were for temporary display and did not store any
objects. This left us with 2,367 museums. The data in the spreadsheet were
sorted on the total number of objects for every museum, the number of unique
objects, the number of database records with digital images, and the number of
images posted online.

Russian museum collections tend to consist of two parts: the main collection of
unique objects and a smaller ‘research collection' including duplicates
and supporting documentation. While the total number of objects in Russian
museum collections slightly exceed 80 million objects, the number of unique
objects is 20 million fewer and equals 60 million objects. The results of
statistical surveys obtained for the study reported the number of digitized
objects as related to the total number of objects in a museum including
their ‘research collections'. This did not create a methodological problem when
comparing the results with those from the Enumerate project which is a study
of the outage of digitisation across Europe, funded by the European Union which
happened between 2011 and 2015 (Europeana, 2016) where the survey asked
to provide the percentage of digital images for museums' analogue collections.

The percentage of digitized objects and the percentage of objects with images
posted online was calculated for each geographical region of the Russian
Federation and mapped to show the differences. The total percentage for the
country was also assessed.

Results

The percentage of digital images as related to the total number of museum
objects across Russia was 13,5%. The percentage related to the number of
objects in the main collection (roughly corresponding to the number of unique
objects) was 18%.

The percentage of images posted online as related to the total number of
objects was 1,5%, this figure was somewhat larger if compared with the number
of objects in the main collection (2%).

An interesting and unexpected result was the difference between the scale of
digitization in two major cities, Moscow and Saint Petersburg (Table 1).
The percentage of objects with digital images was much higher than the average
across Russia in Saint Petersburg and somewhat lower than the average in
Moscow. The scale of digitization across major geographical regions varied
between the minimum of 6% in the Far East and the maximum of 25% in the regions
adjacent to Saint Petersburg (Figure 1, Table 1).

Interestingly, the percentage of images posted online was slightly lower than
the average across Russia for museums in Moscow and twice lower than
the average across Russia in Saint Petersburg (Table 2).

[109-1]

Figure 1. The percentage of the analogue collections digitally reproduced
across geographical regions


[109-2]

Table 1. The percentage of the analogue collections digitally reproduced in the
museums of Saint Petersburg, Moscow, and across Russia

[109-3]

Table 2. The percentage of digital images posted online

Discussion

Our findings demonstrate that digital collections in Russian museums do exist
across the country but we cannot say that their online display is
representative enough to cover the culture, considering the variety
in geography and ethnography.

We can roughly confirm our previous results on the percentage of digitized
images (Kizhner, Terras, Rumyantsev, 2016) to be around 18% as our present data
show the level of digitization to be in the range of 13,5 - 18%. However, our
previous results might have a sampling bias as the museums answering the
questions of the survey could be interested in digitization per se and work
towards obtaining more financial and administrative support to keep it going.
This might result in a higher percentage. Even so, the results of the present
study can only demonstrate a range of digitization scale as the percentage of
images related to the total number of objects may include a significant number
of duplicates and supporting materials (e.g. library books).

This is not an obstacle to comparing our data with those from the Enumerate
project ‘which aimed to survey the extent of digitization across Europe'
(Euro-peana, 2016) where the survey questions were about the percentage of the
analogue collection digitally reproduced, but given the range of 13,5 - 18% we
can say that the results for 2015 are much lower than the results of the
Enumerate project for 2015 when the percentage of digitized collections in
European museums was 31%. However, the results for Saint Petersburg collections
are higher than the European average

(Table 1).

The percentage of images available online across Russia as related to the
analogue collection is 1,5 - 2% which is lower than the percentage reported by
the Enumerate project (24% of digital collections and 7,5% of European analogue
collections). However, the Enumerate results included digital collections and
digitally born objects available online, which complicates the comparison
(Europeana, 2016).

Recent criticism of digitization without proper contribution to building
knowledge in the humanities (Hitchcock, 2013, Gregory et al., 2016) requires
developing these studies further towards exploring how Russian museum web sites
arrange images for searching and browsing and developing projects
discussing the issues of open access and digital canon.

This paper opens up the space for studying Russian digital collections on a
national scale. It also reports on the results of looking at the scale of
digitization for major geographical regions within Russia, and it will discuss
the results of calculating simple correlations of digitization percentage with
population density, the level of education, funding, and the number of museum
goers in the regions. By doing so we can challenge the concept of the digital
canon, and ask difficult questions regarding which types of culture are
being digitized and made available worldwide.

