Getting at Metaphor

Katharine Coles

katharine.coles@utah.edu

University of Utah, United States of America

This paper will discuss how our newly prototyped

POEMAGE visualization tool (see McCurdy et al, 2015), created to identify and
visualize complex sonic relationships within individual poems, has
provided poetry scholars with new ways to identify and conceptualize metaphor,
which has previously been considered computationally intractable because of
its semantic and syntactic complexities. It focuses not on the tool's technical
details but on the ongoing retheorization of poetry it has engendered,

Close readers are trained to connect every element in a poem to every other in
an ambiguous, shifting complex of meaning, which the reader, bringing her own
complexities to the process, activates. This poetic dynamic makes computational
analysis and visualization of any aspect of poetry a challenge. The goal of our
research team has been to take a single poetic element—sound—and treat it
computationally and visually at a level of complexity that will make POE-MAGE
useful to poets and scholars performing sophisticated close readings of poetry,
even as it makes poetry more accessible to students and casual readers. Though
sound interacts with the other features operating within a poem, unlike most
other features it can be looked at in its own terms and is subject to computer
analysis through quantification.

As we began, poet Julie Gonnering Lein and I sought to preserve poetry's
qualitative, aesthetic experience; computer scientists Miriah Meyer and
Nina McCurdy sought to address open questions in their field. Both goals
required moving beyond what the machine could already do. Off-the-shelf
software can see exact rhyme quickly, as can a good reader—who will swiftly
move on to look for sonic relationships that don't replicate themselves but
enact disruptive changes that are hard to identify computationally. To capture
the progression of sonic clusters as they repeat in different and evolving
combinations not only within but across syllables presents a
computational problem that required our technical team to develop RhymeDesign,
which allows users to query a broad range of sonic patterns within a poem and
to design custom templates to query patterns we haven't imagined. Built on top
of RhymeDesign, the POEMAGE interface visualizes and allows users to explore
interactions of the queried patterns.

In performing this work, we have looked for (and not yet found) computational
breakthroughs that might bring metaphor within reach, a process that has
required us to consider closely how metaphor works. The difficulty with
metaphor inheres even in simple instances. Getting the machine to
understand why “Hope is a bird” (or, more problematically, “‘Hope' is the thing
with feathers”) is a metaphor but “Juliet is a Capulet” and “Karen is a
Carpenter” may be either similar or different statements of fact is
not straightforward.

Poets as different as Dickinson and Donne play complex metaphors out across
entire poems in elaborate and shifting figural structures. To develop a
tool that can reliably identify metaphoric relationships as POEMAGE identifies
sonic relationships—in real time across the entire poetic field—would require
the solution of multiple open problems in computer science.

However, recent readings of poems by Dickinson and others, undertaken using
POEMAGE, suggest that it is possible to use the tool to access some
metaphors not directly but indirectly, leveraging the fact that both rhyme and
metaphor operate by substituting one word for another that is
different-but-similar, and that inevitably sites of sonic
difference-in-similarity point to semantic difference-in-similarity as well.
In close reading, we have noted that places the machine marks as being
sonically “interesting” are also sites of metaphorical action, and that this
action often inheres in, rather than simply existing alongside, the sonic
relationships being indicated by the tool. This inherence can emerge through
various kinds of sonic relationships, including but not limited to
homonyms like “knot” and “naught,” which POEMAGE shows in Bradstreet's
“Prologue,” and eye-rhymes like “blood” and “mood,” which it picks up across
Pelizzon's “Blood Memory,” about menstruation. In presenting these words as
related, even conjoined, the machine opens a space for us to tease out figural
connections between a loop in a rope and nothingness, or menstrual blood and
emotional pain.

A more complex example of metaphor developing through sound occurs in
Dickinson's #313:

[110-1]

Figure 1: The user selects from the sonic rhymes available in the left-hand
panel. The middle panel shows by color which words are implicated in a
particular rhyme and which share phenomes. The right-hand panel shows how
various rhymes flow through the poem.

The visualization, which shows words that connect with “soul” through specific
sonic relationships, makes clear at a glance that “soul” is sonically
implicated with virtually every other word in the poem, though of course it is
more strongly associated with some words than others. Its identification with
“you” and “your” is notable, but I am more attentive to its strong links to
“so” (a perfect rhyme and identical except for one dropped phoneme), “slow”
(which deploys exactly the same three phonemes, with the second two reversed),
and “still,” which begins and ends with the same phoneme. Here, then, the
“soul,” identified with “you,” is also sonically and so (because words mean)
semantically identified with, in this order, intensity, slowness, and
stillness. Beyond this, the tool invites an unlikely leap: the connection
of “soul” with the poem's last word, “paws”—a big enough stretch that I am not
sure I would make it without the tool's suggestion. This sonnet, which ends
with what should be a rhymed couplet, teases by failing to do so. However, the
tool's connection of “paws” with “slow” and, through “slow,” to “soul”
and finally “still,” may suggest to the attentive reader an absent but implied
homonym, “pause.” Here, through an indirection of sound, the poem creates a
semantic “rhyme” between “paws/pause” and “still.”

Another case arises from our group's interest in uncertainty analysis, rooted
in our understanding of ambiguity as a fundamental function of language, which
led us to include in POEMAGE a “show uncertainty” button. Even beyond vagaries
of accent, numerous words—tear comes to mind immediately— can be pronounced in
more than one way, and mean differently depending on pronunciation. Every
such word requires the machine to make a “guess”—a statistical prediction—about
how the word is pronounced within the poem. The “show uncertainty” button
allows the user to see words with alternate pronunciations as well as how the
machine has chosen to pronounce them.

In “Night” by Louise Bogan, the tool mishears

[short i] “wind” as [long i] “wind” (note that it rhymes with “tide”:

[110-2]

Figure 2

Given its instructions, and the overwhelming probability that any one-syllable
word comprising a beginning consonant and “ind” will have a long and not a
short vowel, the computer had little choice but to make the “judgment” it did,
even though the proficient human native speaker would not make this delightful
mistake. In this “mishearing” of the poem, an inlet winding becomes “restless,”
and in this restlessness the central metaphor of the poem takes shape. Through
such reading, we can see that tools designed to help forestall error in science
may reveal disturbances that add to the richness of a poem by
opening interpretive space and not only the possibility for but the actual
presence of metaphor.

Of course, “getting at metaphor” in this oblique way, even if we give it a
separate button in the tool, is not the same as creating a tool that will
algorithmically identify and visualize metaphor through its syntactic or
semantic construction. However, in some cases this method may still be useful,
especially for users who believe, as we do, that the purpose of any
visualization is not to replace human reading but to send us back to the poem.
An unexpected by-product of our tool, it is already provoking rich readings,
which show that shaping our queries about sound so that the machine can answer
with metaphor helps us understand dynamics inherent to poetry, which invites
readers to connect every feature to every other feature. Thus, POEMAGE furthers
the larger goal of reliably identifying metaphor through computational methods.
It also suggests ways forward in our overarching goal of identifying such
complex features for visualisation in their own right.

These are just a few instances among many in which POEMAGE queries, by locating
sonic difference in similarity, have identified places in poems that are not
only sonically but metaphorically rich. Though we often believe the complexity
of language may create an obstacle to the computational analysis of poetry,
this argument represents a re-theorization of ways in which a tool originally
meant to aid in one kind of analysis can give access to information and
insight not originally predicted or even sought, not in spite of but because of
poetry's linguistic complexity.

