ARL Digital Scholarship Institute

Sarah Melton

sarah.melton@bc.edu

Boston College, United States of America

Michelle Dalmau

mdalmau@indiana.edu

Indiana University, United States of America

Nora Dimmock

ndimmock@library.rochester.edu

University of Rochester, United States of America

Dan Tracy

dtracy@illinois.edu

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

Erin Glass

erglass@ucsd.edu

UC San Diego, United States of America

This poster will reflect on the Association of Research Libraries' (ARL)
upcoming inaugural weeklong Digital Scholarship Institute for library
professionals. Scheduled for June 2017 at Boston College, the Institute will
introduce librarians and staff who are not currently involved in digital
scholarship to the methodologies and considerations of such work. This
poster will detail successes and lessons learned for future Institutes.

Following two large-scale workshops hosted by the Coalition for Networked
Information (CNI) on planning and supporting digital scholarship centers
in 2014 and 2016, staffing and training emerged as fundamental components to
successful initiatives. In 2014, workshop participants agreed that:

“...it is more important to have the proper mix of abilities overall across
personnel than it is to have any one particular type of staff member.
The ability to learn new skills, adaptability, and agility are qualities in
personnel that can be even more important than the expertise that they
initially bring to the position.” (Lippincott and Goldenberg-Hart, 2014:7)

In 2016, CNI hosted a follow-up workshop in partnership with ARL with over 100
participants. The resulting report from that meeting made it clear that people 
are core to the success of digital scholarship initiatives. Several points of
consensus emerged from the 2016 workshop, two of which ARL has adopted for
the Digital Scholarship Institute:

• Staff need time including time for research, space, recognition, and funding
for intensive professional development, and the freedom and ability to develop
library digital projects

• Skill-building goes beyond workshops and collaborations, and is often rooted
in culture change and support from administration (Goldenberg-Hart, 2016.)

In response to these discussions, the ARL Digital Scholarship Institute
Advisory Group identified several core principles that underpin digital
scholarship initiatives with an emphasis on cultural change: collaboration,
critical thinking, and disciplinary contexts. Rather than starting with tools
or technologies, the Institute emphasizes these concepts as building blocks of
digital scholarship.

By providing a five day, face-to-face immersive environment, the Institute will
cultivate collaboration and create cohorts of digital scholarship
practitioners. These cohorts will learn together, share experiences, and work
on future endeavors through followup online meetings that will ensure
participants have opportunities to put core principles into practice.
Participants will learn core principles related to metadata and data curation,
copyright and fair use, and project management. They will also learn how to
apply these concepts in the context of digital pedagogy and collaboration with
researchers. These applications build on existing librarian skillsets
related to instruction and to work with researchers needing to clarify and
refine research ideas. The framework of the Digital Scholarship Institute thus
bridges existing library capacities with new knowledge and skills that will
transform their work as they increasingly partner with researchers on digital
scholarship using diverse digital methods and tools.

The ARL Digital Scholarship Institute also builds on the University of
Rochester's pilot Institute for Mid-Career Librarians in Digital Humanities
funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. The program invited twenty
librarians from across the US and Canada to take part in a three-day intensive
residential institute followed by monthly online meet-ups from

July 2015-June 2016.

The pilot successfully built a strong cohort among the attendees, who were
assigned to one of four curriculum tracks based on their interests:
text encoding, analysis and visualization; digital pedagogy and digital media
literacy; digital mapping and archeology; and metadata, data curation, and
data modeling. A core curriculum included workshops on project management, data
modeling, and copy-right/fair use. Objectives of the pilot institute included
strengthening librarian practice to support digital humanities, creating a
structure to support sustained skills development, and integrating with future
ARL initiatives.

Attendees participated in assessment activities throughout the year-long pilot,
providing data to inform the creation of sustainable programs. In October 2016
teams from five institutions, University of Rochester, Indiana University,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, San Diego State University,
and Boston College, met to workshop the creation of a program that would be
foundational to creating these new communities of practice. This
multi-institutional initiative will provide an opportunity for broader
transformation in the academic library ecosystem at the level necessary to
create a strong community of practice around digital scholarship work.

