Novel Approaches to Research and Discovery Urban History

Sander Münster

sander.muenster@tu-dresden.de

Technische Universität Dresden, Germany

Kristina Friedrichs

kristina.friedrichs@tu-dresden.de

Technische Universität Dresden, Germany

Cindy Kröber

cindy.kroeber@tu-dresden.de

Universität Wurzburg, Germany

Jonas Bruschke

jonas.bruschke@tu-dresden.de

Universitat Wurzburg, Germany

Frank Henze

frank.henze@btu-cottbus.de

Technische Universität Dresden, Germany

Florian Niebling

florian.niebling@uni-wuerzburg.de Universitat Wurzburg, Germany

Abstract

The research group on four-dimensional research and communication of urban
history (HistStadt4D) aims to investigate and develop methods and technologies
to transfer extensive repositories of historical media and their contextual
information into a threedimensional spatial model, with an additional temporal
component. This will make content accessible to different target groups,
researchers and the public, via a 4D browser. A
location-dependent augmented-reality representation can be used as
an information base, research tool, and to communicate historical knowledge.
The data resources available for this research include extensive holdings of
historical photographs of Dresden, which have documented the city over the
decades, and digitized map collections on the Deutsche Fotothek (German
photographic collection) platform. These will lay the foundation for a
prototype model which will give users a virtual experience of historic parts of
Dresden.

Introduction

Imagine you’re exploring the historic center of a city with its impressive town
houses, churches and monuments. What if you could just use your mobile to find
out about the historic buildings around you, with detailed visual information
about how they were built and the story behind them, mak-ing history come
alive before your eyes?

Photographs and plans are an essential source for historical research (Burke,
2003, Paul, 2006, Wohlfeil, 1986, Perez-Gomez and Pelletier, 1997) and key
objects in eHumanities (Kwastek, 2014). Numerous digital image archives,
containing vast numbers of photographs, have been set up in the context
of digitization projects . These extensive repositories of image media are
still difficult to search. It is not easy to identify sources relevant for
re-search, analyze and contextualize them, or compare them with the historical
original. The eHumanities research group HistStadt4D, funded by the German
Fed-eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) until July 2020,
is investigating and developing methods and technologies for this. The junior
research group consists of 14 people - including 4 post-doctoral and 4 PhD
researchers. Since a focal interest is to comprehensively investigate how to
enhance accessibility of large scale image repositories, researchers and
research approaches originate from the humanities, geo- and information
technologies as well as from educational and information studies. In contrast
to adjacent projects dealing primarily with large scale linked text data as the
Venice Time Machine project (2017), sources addressed by the junior group are
primarily historical photographs and plans. Historical media and their
con-textual information are being transferred into a 4D - 3D spatial and
temporal scaled - model to support research and education on urban history.
Content will be made accessible in two ways; via a 4D browser and a
location-dependent augmented-reality representation. The prototype database
consists of about 200,000 digitized historical photographs and plans of Dresden
from the Deutsche Fotothek (German photographic collection).

Key Aspects

Usage scenarios and research values

Digital image repositories meet a wide range of needs, from research in
humanities and information technologies, through museum contexts and
library studies to tourist applications (Munster, 2011). Architectural
historians have developed various methods of analyzing both preserved and
never-built or destroyed structures in chronology and context (Brassat
and Kohle, 2003). Style analysis, iconographic approaches, and art sociological
methods all address structural historical questions. The technological
possibilities of digital image repositories allow architecture historians to
draw on a much larger stock of material, and to process and evaluate this from
new perspectives. In addition, innovative software tools can be used to locate
sources temporally and spatially, or to support dating, stylistic criticism,
authorizations or archaeological investigations (Verstegen, 2007). Depending on
the user group, a number of contradictory requirements must be met.
Historical researchers, for example, need to be able to compare and
contextualize sources (Munster et al., 2015, Brandt, 2012, Wohlfeil, 1986), and
to trace the relationship between source and representation (Favro, 2006,
Niccolucci and Hermon, 2006). This includes identifying formal patterns,
singularities, and discontinuities in architecture and cityscape. This raises a
host of questions: How do buildings and cities change over time? In which
contexts, such as political or formal developments, does a historical
cityscape evolve? What similarities can be found between objects in terms of
construction standards and requirements, building codes, regional, temporal
or personal tastes and styles?

The research group will address these and many more questions in a specific
project on the interdependence between urban development and urban photography.

Creating targeted tools for working with image repositories

An adjacent task will be to perform a systematic survey of the needs of users
of image repositories, whose findings will be used to
conceptualize technological support options. As historic images, objects and
information are increasingly being digitized on a massive scale, more content
becomes available for investigation; more cross-analyses are possible; more
knowledge is collected, structured and shared (Schuller, 2009). The new scale
of research and information retrieval creates many new challenges. Many
scholars note that online searching for images and information is
“counter-productive” due to the amount of irrelevant data retrieved or their
limited technical abilities (Beaudoin and Brady, 2011). Access and efficient
data retrieval is inhibited for a variety of reasons. The degree of search
expertise is as important as the functionalities and usability of the platform
(Kemman et al., 2014). A lot of the existing tools of research programs and
applications stem from computer science and do not necessarily meet the needs
of humanities scholars (Dudek et al., 2015). Users need efficient search and
filter functions, an intuitive software interface and navigation system 
(Barreau et al., 2014). Appropriate documentation through metadata plays an
important role in ensuring sustainability (Bentkowska-Kafel et al., 2012,
Maina and Suleman, 2015). In contrast, users expect an intuitive and feasible
introduction to the topic and data (Maina and Suleman, 2015) with options to
find out more as required. The simplest way to link and contextualize visual
information is to use highlighted keywords as hyperlinks in texts and captions.
Data interaction and processing tools are also essential for research (Webb and
O’Carroll, 2013, Hecht et al., 2015).

Photogrammetric methods of visual knowledge generation

A possible technological basis for creating access to large scale image
repositories is the spatial and temporal aggregation of data, in this case
historical photographs in a 4D model. The potential of photographic images
ranges from pure documentation in archaeology and monument preservation,
through image interpretation, for example for damage documentation, to the
produc-tion of complex 3D models for archaeological investigations (Buhrer et
al., 2001). Geometrical reconstruction from historical photographs is based on
photogrammetry. Information from multiple 2D images is used to acquire 2D and
3D object geome-tries and have frequently been applied on historical
and measurement images (cf. Wiedemann et al., 2000, Brauer-Burchardt and Voss,
2001, Henze et al., 2009, Siedler et al., 2011). Since some decades,
traditional analytical photogrammetry has increasingly been complemented by
digital image processing and analysis. The elaborate process of manual
image analysis can be largely automated, resulting in large image collections
from which geometric in-formation can be generated automatically (Pomaska,
2011). To date, automated photogrammetric methods are generally used primarily
to evaluate current, mostly digital images. So far, this has rarely been done
for historical images, as it involves specific challenges. Scanned analogue
records usually have unknown camera metrics, missing or minimal
object information and low radiometric and geometric resolution. Our aim is to
develop application-oriented tools for photogrammetric analysis of
his-torical photographs, to integrate them into the process of historical image
analysis (Fig 1), and to create a spatial relationship to today’s situation.

[123-1]

Figure 1. 3D model based on current photographs and historical photographs
(proof-of-concept)

Augmented reality

The prototype 4D model, and the 4D historical photographs, drawings, plans, and
information within it, will be made accessible via a location or
context related information access as augmented reality (Munster and Niebling,
2016). This technology has gained importance in the last few years and
undergone extensive testing (Livingston et al., 2008, Zollner et al., 2010,
Walczak et al., 2011, Chang et al., 2015, Chung et al.,    2015). Augmented
reality describes the

enrichment of the real world through virtual data, which can include 3D models,
texts, pictures, films or audio data.

[123-2]

Figure 2. Augmented-reality representation of a cit-yscape (mockup)

Enriching the reality or replacing parts of reality can help to bridge the
cognitive gap between our daily life experience of a city-scape and its
depiction in historical photographs (Niebling et al., 2008). In the historical
context, the viewer is able to interactively capture visual and textual
information about objects in their historical spatial reference system (Ridel
et al., 2014). Our investigation will focus on the accessibility of historical
data: How can interaction with virtual buildings be designed? Which metaphors
can be used? How can augmented reality support educational and research
settings?

4D browser

[123-3]

Figure 3. 4D-Browser (prototype)

As an alternative path, the 4D model will also be accessible via a 4D browser
interface for spatially and temporally located searches in media repositories.
An basing application prototype of a research platform for 3D reconstruction
projects is in development was developed during a master thesis (Bruschke,
2015), employing approaches, such as semantic data linking and visualization of
temporally and spatially arranged information (Gouveia et al., 2015). Since the
prototype has focused on individual building complexes, the 4D browser
application has to visualize an entire city model, which also changes
constantly over time. Moreover, a visual interface is proposed to
make additional information accessible, such as the current and original
location of the depicted object. Further features intended to support scholarly
users of the prospected platform are image rectification tools and overlays
combining several pictures from different periods which can shed light on
changes in a building. Statistical analyses of photographed objects over
time may provide information on a building’s significance. Last but not least,
the application should be intuitive to operate for a heterogeneous user group
(Warwick, 2012).

Summary

As a result of huge and concerted digitization efforts, extensive digital
repositories of historical photographs have been created in the past
few decades. This volume of data presents a major challenge to support search,
access and information enrich-ment for users. In August 2016, the HistStadt4D
research group started exam-ining scientific methodological requirements and
intuitive user interfaces for dealing with massive media repositories from a
multi-disciplinary perspective.

