In Defense of Sandcastles: Research Thinking through Visualization in DH

Uta Hinrichs

uh3@st-andrews.ac.uk

University of St Andrews, United Kingdom

Stefania Forlini,

sforlini@ucalgary.ca

University of Calgary, Canada

Introduction

Although recent research acknowledges the potential of visualization methods in
DH, the predominant terminology used to describe visualizations (prototypes,
tools) narrowly focuses on their use as a means to an end and, more
importantly, as an instrument in the service of humanities research. While
acknowledging the broad range of possible approaches to visualization, we
introduce the metaphor of the sandcastle to highlight visualization as a
research process in its own

right. We argue that building visualization sandcas-

ties provides a holistic approach to interdisciplinary knowledge generation
that embraces visualization as (1) a dynamic interdisciplinary process where
speculation and re-interpretation advance knowledge in all disciplines
involved, (2) a mediator of ideas and theories within and across disciplines
and (3) an aesthetic provocation to elicit critical insights,
interpretation, speculation and discussions within and beyond scholarly
audiences. We illustrate our argument based on our own research of an
exceptional literary collection.

Visualization tools vs. sandcastles

Pivotal Scene

A steering committee meeting for a large-scale DH project. The goal of this
interdisciplinary project is a combined computational and literary analysis of
a literary collection, which will include the development of visualizations to
enable the open-ended exploration of this collection by literary scholars. As
the discussion starts to focus on the intended project outcomes, questions
around the visualizations and their practical and research contributions arise.
What role do visualizations play as part of DH projects? What makes them
a valid contribution? One committee member brings it to the point: “Are we
building tools or just sandcastles?”

This question contrasts sandcastles—tailored, unique, often stunning yet also
transient and unstable interactive visualizations—with more
pragmatic, functional and transferable visualization tools. This framing is a
provocation: these approaches are not necessarily diametrically opposed or
mutually exclusive, but, rather, exist along a rich continuum. Even within one
research project, the process can shift from a more transient ‘sandcastle' to a
more targeted instrumental approach. And yet, the preference toward the latter
is evident in recent DH discussions (Gibbs et al., 2012) and in a push by
funding bodies toward research with concrete, high-impact outcomes.
Notably, however, visualization ‘tools or prototypes' (terms typically used
interchangeably) are not usually seen as research contributions in their own
right (Schreibman et al., 2010) but, at best, as facilitators of research or as
a way to communicate underlying research contributions. An overly pragmatic
approach to visualization, and DH tool-building more generally, however, not
only risks overlooking the value of the design process but also relegating
computer science and design to service-based roles. What happens when we
consider, as Bruno Latour has argued, that “far from fulfilling any purpose”, a
new technology actually “ex-plor[es] heterogeneous universes that nothing, up
to that point, could have foreseen and behind which trail new functions”
(Latour, 2002: 250)? What happens when we attend to the design process—and its
many detours—as a research process in and of itself?

As a relatively young research field, information visualization (InfoVis) has
seen calls to carefully and critically (re-)evaluate sometimes dated
assumptions (see Kosara, 2016). Similarly, despite the increasing application
of visualization in diverse DH contexts (Ja-nicke et al., 2015), it remains a
relatively new approach and a call for generalizable visualization tools—
drawing on science-based use cases—may reproduce unexamined assumptions and
overlook important nuances of humanistic data and inquiry that is typically of
a qualitative and interpretative nature (Drucker, 2011). As Latour argues, the
ways in which we represent our arguments changes the way in which we argue
(Latour, 1986). Introducing visualization into literary studies, introduces new
modes of knowledge production. As such, we need to engage in open-minded and
open-ended explorations of visualization as a research (rather than
engineering) process, paying close attention to the ways this process changes
our perspectives on data and research questions. At a time when leading
practitioner-theorists suggest design as central to DH (Burdick et al.,
2012), we must develop a more nuanced, critical language to discuss and further
engage with the wide range of design approaches, especially from fields such as
InfoVis and human computer interaction (HCI) that already combine design
practice and research.

The call for a broader perspective on technology design within DH is not new,
but it is increasingly urgent as the pragmatic value of visualization tools
risks overshadowing the profoundly fertile design process as an intellectual
and cognitive practice or a “method of thinking-through-practice” (Burdick et
al., 2012). Previous work has discussed “tools” in DH as “experiments” or
“embodiments of ideas” (Sinclair et al., 2011), advocated for prototypes as
arguments in their own right (Galey & Ruecker, 2010), and
highlighted visualization as a starting point to humanities research rather
than a means to an end (Hinrichs et al., 2015; Forlini et al., 2015b; Hinrichs
et al., 2016). Furthermore, critical perspectives from within the DH (Drucker,
2011) and InfoVis communities (Dork et al., 2013; Hullman & Diakopoulos, 2011)
call for further examinations of the rhetoric of visualizations. Expanding on
these discussions, we reclaim the ‘sandcastle' as a lens through which to
critically examine current DH discussions of technology design and to promote
an open-ended, speculative and process-oriented approach to visualization
design based on a robust model of interdisciplinary collaboration that
advances knowledge in all research fields involved. Our argument is grounded in
critical theory, design research, HCI and InfoVis, as well as in our own
experience of combining research in literary studies and visualization to
explore an untapped collection—the Gibson Anthologies of Speculative Fiction
(Forlini et al., 2015b; Hinrichs et al., 2015).

Building sandcastles at the intersection of literary studies and InfoVis

Our project—the Stuff of Science Fiction—explores a vast untapped collection of
10,000+ science fiction stories single-handedly compiled into 888 handcrafted
anthologies by the avid science fiction fan, artist and collector Bob Gibson
(see Fig.1). This unusual collection raises a number of questions regarding
the evolution of science fiction in the context of popular periodicals and the
role of fan practices in sustaining and promoting this popular genre. Working
with a subcollection of 1,500+ stories, we developed interactive visualizations
that came together as the Speculative W@nderverse (see Fig. 2) to help us
explore and analyze these stories through their metadata.

The W@nderverse can be considered a tool, or at least a prototype, and we have
discussed it as such in our own humanities (Forlini et al., 2015a; Forlini et
al., 2015b) and InfoVis publications (Hinrichs et al., 2016). In many ways it
is a means to certain valuable ends: (1) it makes the Gibson anthologies
explorable from different (visual) perspectives by multiple scholarly and
public audiences, (2) it has generated insights about the collection, and (3)
it showcases InfoVis design considerations specific to visualizing
untapped literary collections (Hinrichs et al., 2016).

[133-1]

Figure 1. The Gibson Anthologies of Speculative Fiction

[133-2]

Figure 2. The Speculative W@nderverse visualization

However, if we reflect on our process with our initial research questions on
one end and the visualization as a reflection of our research outcomes on the
other, it becomes clear that the W@nderverse is not just a tool, at least not
in the narrowly instrumental sense. It only appears to be a means to certain
ends in retrospect when we overlook our many detours in order to narrate (for
the sake of dissemination) a direct line from our questions to our
contributions. However, our grant proposal and the copious notes through which
we documented our research process (see Neu-

staedter & Sengers, 2012) remind us of our initial intentions and reveal the
transformative nature of our

collaborative “prototyping” process, which profoundly altered our research
questions and intentions as well as our perspectives on the collection and our
respective disciplines—literary studies and InfoVis. The W@nderverse is
therefore both the mediator and manifestation of our exploratory and
interdisciplinary research process. Our many design detours (necessitated by
ongoing archival discoveries and visualization experiments, see Fig. 3), show
what is now largely invisible yet fundamental to the W@nderverse: our research
thinking through visualization, an approach that has its parallel in HCI with
“research through design” (Zimmerman, 2007).

[133-3]

Figure 3: Early visual speculations leading up to the W@nderverse

In order to investigate humanities questions from truly novel perspectives and
to engage in profoundly interdisciplinary collaborations that combine
humanities and visualization research (not engineering!) approaches, we
advocate for research thinking through the creation of visualization
sandcastles as:

• Aesthetic and in-flux manifestations of visualization as a speculative,
provocative process that generates insights about: 1-the underlying collection;
2-(visualization) design considerations; 3-needs of the intended audience(s);
4-and new research questions which, in turn, drive the development of new (and
different) sandcastles and grounded insights valuable to all involved
disciplines,

• Dynamic mediators that by provoking and guiding discussions can bridge
boundaries between disciplines (e.g., literary studies & InfoVis) and between
academic and fan endeavors, and

• Aesthetic provocations that can promote

critical discussions of best practices for studying and making accessible
cultural collections among scholarly and public audiences.

