Goal of the BEOL-platform and its technical basis

Integrating historical

scientific texts into the

Bernoulli-Euler Online

platform

Tobias Schweizer

t.schweizer@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Sepideh Alassi

sepideh.alassi@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Martin Mattmüller

martin.mattmueller@unibas.ch

Bernoulli Euler Centre, University of Basel, Switzerland

Lukas Rosenthaler

lukas.rosenthaler@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Helmut Harbrecht

helmut.harbrecht@unibas.ch

Bernoulli Euler Centre, University of Basel, Switzerland

Introduction

Bernoulli-Euler Online (BEOL) is an interdisciplinary research project funded
by the Swiss National Science Foundation focusing on the mathematics influenced
by the Bernoulli dynasty and Leonhard Euler. It is being carried out by the
Bernoulli Euler Centre and the Digital Humanities Lab at the University of
Basel. Its main goal is the integration of different edition projects relating
to the Bernoullis and Leonhard Euler into one target platform, offering
appropriate functionality for researchers interested in the history of science.

The methodological efforts will also be applicable to other editions since they
are developed in a generic way. BEOL is based on Knora, a generic
infrastructure for humanities data.

BEOL aims at integrating three edition projects, that are currently all
technically different and thus incompatible with one another:

• Basler Edition der Bernoulli-Briefwechsel

(BEBB): BEBB is an online edition that is based on the MediaWiki software and
hosted by the University Library of Basel. It is connected to the library's
metadata catalogue for manuscripts (Basler Inventar der
Ber-noulli-Briefwechsel)^_ The letters are encoded in Wiki markup and are
converted to HTML to represent them on the web. The mathematical formulae are
encoded in LaTeX.

•    Leonhardi Euleri Opera Omnia (LEOO): LEOO is a printed edition of the
works of Leonhard Euler that was begun in the early 20^th century. In the
context of BEOL, the volume containing Euler's correspondence with Christian
Goldbach (Euler 2015) will be integrated as a proof of concept. This volume
has been prepared using LaTeX (as well as the volume with Euler's
correspondence with Daniel Bernoulli that has been published recently). We
expect to be able to integrate all the other recent volumes set in LaTeX in
a similar manner. For the older volumes, the printed books would have to be
scanned (including OCR) and marked up.

•    Jacob (I) Bernoulli's scientific notebook Med-itationes: The manuscript is
held in the university library of Basel (shelfmark L Ia 3, 367 pages) and has
already been digitized. The manuscript consisting of 287 entries is
being transcribed at the Bernoulli Euler Centre using XML (The XML format is
specified closely to the TEI specifications P5, so it can be transformed quite
easily to TEI/XML) for the text and LaTeX for the mathematical notation that is
embedded in the XML.

The three edition projects do not only overlap thematically, but also in terms
of the persons involved (authors, mentioned persons) and bibliographical items
(literature referred to in the texts, references in-between the editions'
texts). Letters exchanged between members of the Bernoulli dynasty, Leonhard
Euler and contemporary mathematicians and scientists are an important part of
these edition projects and thus it is desirable to identify and match the
persons in all editions in order to display their relations.

The technical basis for BEOL is Knora, an infrastructure for humanities data
(Rosenthaler and others 2015) consisting of an RDF-triplestore, an OWL
base ontology, and a RESTful API that allows for querying and adding to the
data. The base ontology (see prefix ‘Knora' in Figure 1) defines common value
types (such as a calendar independent format to represent dates using the
Julian Day Number) used among humanities projects and can be further extended
in project specific ontologies. BEOL will provide such an ontology (see prefix
‘BEOL' in Figure 1), defining its own resource classes and properties needed to
represent the edition projects' texts and entities. Wherever possible, existing
ontologies will be reused by making subclasses and subproperties. BEOL is part
of the NIE-INE project, which aims to create a general-purpose
infrastructure for digital editions, using Knora as its technical foundation. A
focus of this project will be abstracting out concepts shared by different
projects and formalising them as ontologies.

[147-1]

Figure 1: BEOL network and its components

Figure 1 represents all relations between persons (We refer to the Integrated
Authority File (GND), and in order to represent locations, we will also refer
to GeoNames), letters, and manuscripts (we also link to the catalogue of the
Basel university library that keeps many of the original copies of the letters
and manuscripts of BEOL), as well as their properties as directed graphs. For
reasons of clarity, we use a simplified model here. The coloured rectangles
indicate that

these have been imported from different edition projects which - considered in
isolation - do not allow for this kind of overview. Moreover, indices and
bibliographies have to be unified on the BEOL platform (e.g., Christian
Goldbach occurs both in BEBB and LEOO). The BEOL platform will be connected to 
Early Modern Letters Online, so it will be interoperable with other edition
projects.

Importing editions to the same target environment

In order to represent all three editions in the same target environment, they
have to be homogenised first. We decided to do so using an XML-based
approach. This has the additional advantage that we can make both the texts of
BEBB and LEOO available as TEI/XML to the outside world quite easily by
applying XSL transformations. We can also use the same routine to import the
editions into BEOL. Knora converts XML-encoded texts to RDF in order to store
them in the triplestore. From RDF, an XML document can be recreated that
is equivalent to the one originally imported. A mapping defines the relations
between XML elements and attributes and the entities defined in the ontology.

•    BEBB Wiki markup can be transformed to XML using a MediaWiki parse . Wiki
tags and structures are mapped to XML tags, and references to other letters,
bibliographical items, and images (facsimiles of the letters) can be handled.
Once the letters are available on the BEOL platform, the old URLs will have to
be forwarded.

•    The Goldbach-volume of LEOO is set in LaTeX and can be converted to XML
using La-TeXML. Additional mappings to the available standard functionality and
customisations can be provided using Perl scripts. LaTeXML provides a MathML
conversion for mathematical formulae.

•    The Meditationes are transcribed in an XML-based format (see LaTeXML).
Derived texts of these files can be generated using XSL-transformations. In
this way, several layers (diplomatic, normalized) of the text can be produced.
Our approach addresses segments defined on the facsimile (see Figure 2)
and turns them into a reading text step by step. The figures (see segment
‘M151-03-F' in Figure 2Figure ) will be extracted by applying a combination of
various image processing techniques and redrawn as vector graphics.

[147-2]

Figure 2. Part of Meditatio 151


