Mnemosyne, Digital

Library for Rare and

Forgotten Texts (18681936): Collections and Digital Editions

Dolores Romero López

dromero@filol.ucm.es

Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain

Lucía Cotarelo Esteban

luzia_cotarelo@hotmail.com

Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain

José Luis Bueren Gómez-Acebo

Biblioteca Nacional de España, Spain

joseluis.bueren@bne.es

The objective of Mnemosyne, Digital Library for Rare and Forgotten Literary
Texts (1868-1936) is to select, categorize, and make visible (in a
digital format) literary texts that belong to a forgotten repertoire in order
to allow the historiografical review of the period. Mnemosyne has a repertoire
of texts and authors who have remained in the shadow of the great literary
figures of the first third of the 20th century. This digital library intends to
be a field of international experimentation for the creation of interoperable
semantic networks through which a large group of scholars could generate
innovative research and theoretical reading models for literary texts.

Mnemosyne aims to be an open-access digital library allowing data modelling for
specific collections (such as intellectual women, Madrid in the Silver Age
literature, children kiosk literature, science fiction, photonovels, etc.) in
support of research and teaching on Silver Age Spain. Through Mnemosyne it can
be accessed digital edition of texts. The digitization of these works has been
carried out by public and private institutions. The first version of the
library is stored on the server of the Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Library, itself linked to the collections of the digital library Ha-thiTrust.40
In a search conducted in HathiTrust in 2012, the names, surnames, and
pseudonyms of selected authors were used to locate a total of 2,873

digitized texts corresponding to “odd and forgotten”

writers. The Biblioteca Digital Hispánica, which serves as the access portal
for the digital collections of the Biblioteca Nacional de España,
provided 2,448 works by male authors and 1,017 works by female writers. Now we
are working on the interactive editions of some short stories with the support
of the Spanish Biblioteca Nacional.

Behind the scenes of Mnemosyne's public presence online, the project is
developing with the aid of the tool Clavy. Clavy is an RIA (Rich Internet
Application) that is able to import, preserve, and edit information from
collections of digital objects so as to build bridges between digital
repositories and create collections of enriched digital content. Clavy also
provides a basic system of data visualization, edition, and navigation. There
are plans to integrate @Note, a collaborative annotation application, into 
Clavy. These two computational tools were developed by the ILSA at the
Universidad Complutense de Madrid.44 Clavy facilitates the import, export, and
edition of records in multiple formats such as MARC2145, as well as their
integration into Mne-mosine's predesigned model with a view to their export
into other compatible formats like XLS (Excel Binary File Format) or XML
(Extensible Markup Language), or into other systems like OdA.46 Using Clavy,
metadata for more than four thousand digitized objects from HathiTrust and the
Biblioteca Digital Hispánica have already been imported into the Mnemosyne
database. Logically, the data from these sources was described in MARC21,
following the rules for library catalogs. The outcome was forseeable: in some
cases, Mnemosyne's data model did not require the degree of detail furnished
by MARC21, while in other cases it was necessary to incorporate new information
absent from that format.

Acknowledgements

Mnemosyne, Digital Library for Rare and Forgotten Literary Texts (1868-1936) is
the work of two research teams (LEETHI and LOEP) affiliated with the
Universidad Complutense de Madrid and funded by the publicly subsidized
national research project “Escritorios Electrónicos para las Literaturas”
(Referencia FFI2012-34666, 2012-2015), by

the private BBVA Foundation which subsidized the Project “Modelo Unificado de
Gestión de Colecciones Digitales con Estructuras Reconfigurables: Aplicación a
la Creación de Bibliotecas Digitales Especializadas para Investigación y
Docencia” (2015-2017) and by eLITE-CM project “Edición Literaria Electrónica
(Ref. S2015/HUM-3426, 20162018)”.

