Understanding Narrative:

Computational Approaches to Detecting Narrative Frames

Eva Portelance

eva.portelance@mail.mcgill.ca

McGill University, Canada

Andrew Piper

andrew.piper@mcgill.ca

McGill University, Canada

Understanding narrative structure at a large scale remains a challenging
problem within the field of cultural analytics and computational linguistics.
Our aim with this project is to develop novel methods to study the pacing of
narrative scene changes and the overall distribution of different plotlines
within novels. Being able to analyze such narrative features at large scale can
give us insights into the way different genres, time periods, or cultures favor
different modes of storytelling. In this project we formalize definitions
of narrative scenes and implement new methods of detection and clustering using
computational methods.

The project involves three steps: creating an operational concept of a
narrative frame; the algorithmic segmentation of narratives by frames; and the
predictive clustering of frames into larger-scale “plotlines.”

We define a “frame” as a significant shift of three variables in a given text
window: entities, actions, and objects, which we represent using POS tagging
as proper names, verbs, and nouns. We measure significant lexical shift of our
three primary variables in a sliding textual window of 1000 words with
increments of 100-word shifts. We test window-size and variable selection
relative to human annotation to determine the best performing model. We
resolve frames into “plotlines” using hierarchical clustering, also
demonstrated in our poster. “Frames” serve as inferred textual units and
“plotlines” as aggregated clusters of frames.

We have tested the performance of different combination of variable selection
on nine 12,000-word passages from novels of different genres from a range of
time periods (from 1818 to 2011). To date, our algorithm outperforms the
current state-of-the-art in Hearst's Texttiling algorithm (1994; 1997) when
it comes to placing breaks in the narrative event progression. The performance
of our system relative to human performance on the same task (F1 82%, Precision
81%, Recall 86%), shows an F1 score of 69% with 71% precision and 67% recall,
where % annotators agreement is considered to be a true frame boundary.
Hearst's method applied to the same problem performs at a significantly lower
rate (F1 18%, Precision 18%, Recall 19%). While the overall problem remains
challenging we show significant improvement over state of the art systems at
detecting narrative segments. Nevertheless, the imperfect accuracy suggests
that scene changes have a number of subtle variables that are not exclusively
tied to vocabulary or character shifts, which indicate further avenues for
future research.

Our poster will present our formalization of narrative events, the results and
approach of the segmentation task and the clustering models used. We see this
project as a crucial contribution to the larger study of narrative form across
different literary genres and time periods.

