Mapping the Enlightenment: Intellectual Networks and the Making of Knowledge
in the European Periphery

Vassilis Routsis

v.routsis@ucl.ac.uk

Centre for Digital Humanities

University College London, United Kingdom

Eirini Goudarouli

egoudarouli@gmail.com

The National Archives, United Kingdom

Manolis Patiniotis

mpatin@phs.uoa.gr

National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,

Greece

The project Mapping the Enlightenment: Intellectual Networks and the Making of
Knowledge in

the European Periphery is funded by the Research Centre for Humanities (RCH)
for the academic year 2016-2017. The project uses interactive mapping tools for
visualising, exploring, and analysing the intellectual and geographical
networks developed by Greek-speaking scholars of the Ottoman Empire during the
17^th and 18^th centuries. Based on the convergence of the latest achievements
in digital mapping and historiographical discussions about the representation
of the Enlightenment, the project develops user-friendly interactive and
dynamic web maps of the itineraries of traveling scholars, and visually
represent the building of networks between scientific centers and peripheries.
Additionally, this dynamic system provides multi-layered maps that enables
users to query and visualize data and flows through a modern and robust
environment. This interactive interface offers a simple and effective way of
showing how the intellectual networks developed within the European periphery
in the 17^th and the 18^th centuries contributed to the shaping of knowledge
during the Enlightenment. The project is a collaboration between the Department
of History and Philosophy of Science of the National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens and the Centre for Digital Humanities of University
College, London.

The theoretical background of the project resides in the history of science.
Following the general idea that the knowledge systems that gradually dominated
European modernity have come into being through a dynamic and multi-layered
process, the project is based on the notion of ‘moving localities' introduced
by historians involved with the Science and Technology in European Periphery
(STEP) network. The concept of ‘moving localities' enables historians to
perceive circulation as a knowledge production process. Locality, in this
sense, indicates a complex set of connections, allegiances and commitments
which travel with people and thus extend beyond conventional boundaries,
creating interconnected intellectual spaces over wide geographical areas. The
sense of locality enables actors to perform distinct cultural identities in the
course of their travels that are informed, but not confined by those assigned
by their places of origin. Thus, locality can be said to be a local culture
made active and open to transformation thanks to encounters fostered by travel
conditions.

The project takes advantage of the theories of the STEP network on the one hand
and the latest achievements in digital mapping on the other, in order to create
a visual representation of the above-mentioned concept of ‘moving localities'.
The creation of a research tool will contribute to enhancing users'
understanding of the emergence of modern science and technology as the
expression of a dynamical geography. Addressing the spatiality of knowledge,
the project focuses on associating particular cultural traits with specific
points on a map, and work on tracking down the various paths and encounters
through which such cultural traits and the respective knowledge practices
evolved. In this context, centres and peripheries are not regarded as tokens of
a steady, hierarchical geography, but rather as mutually dependent and
co-constructed entities whose status can change with time.

The development of the user-friendly interactive interface initially focuses on
the intellectual and geographical travels of the 18^th-century Greek-speaking
scholars, who developed an extended network connecting the most important
European educational centers with the most important power centers of the
Ottoman world. Adopting such an approach allows more historical actors to enter
the scene, such as the Portuguese estrangeirados and Spanish pensionados. The
visualisation of the paths followed by the Greek-speaking scholars, the 
estrangeirados and the pensionados enriches this historical and digital
representation of the Enlightenment in the periphery.

The technical plan aims to use and supports open source software. The project
ambitiously strives to make every possible bit of information queryable and
visualised. On the server side, Apache, Post-greSQL, PHP and GeoServer with
PostGIS library are

the principal technologies that are used for the processing and serving of the
data. On the client side, the latest versions of the web standards model
HTML5, CSS3 and JavaScript provides a modern and user-friendly user interface.
Initially, the scholars flow data are processed, normalized and ingested into
the geo-enabled    PostgreSQL database. The

visualisations of the data are materialised using the Leaflet library and other
JavaScript libraries such as D3.js, Chart.js etc. The combination of the
above technologies gives life to our historical data by combining powerful
visualisation components and a data-driven approach to DOM manipulation.

This project does not aim to create visuals and maps per se; instead, it
perceives these techniques as the medium to assess and display the findings of
historical research that critically challenges the received narrative
concerning early modern intellectual European networks. The creation of a
visual image of the dynamic, multi-layer process of knowledge-shaping in the
European periphery challenges current digital projects which mainly reflect the
mainstream positivist histories of the Enlightenment. The intellectual networks
developed within and across the periphery are mainly absent from the mainstream
histories of the Enlightenment and if they are recognized, they are typically
treated as the paths of intellectually parochial scholars who were unable to
fully embrace the ideal of modernisation through reason and science. Bringing
such figures to the forefront, and confirming their role in the production of
scientific and technical knowledge, may help historians tell more nuanced
stories about the complex cultural encounters, which molded the European
intellectual space and the multifarious knowledge exchanges that shaped the
notion of European science and technology. By using modern digital techniques,
we aim to enhance the picture of the European periphery as a historiographical
standpoint in order to transcend the established spatial hierarchies and bring
to the fore the continuous re-inventions, conceptual shifts and cultural
adjustments, which are responsible for the shaping of modern scientific and
technical knowledge. The proposed project presents an innovative narrative of
the making of knowledge during the Enlightenment. At the same time, it
constitutes a unique combination of the latest web and mapping technologies,
and provides innovative means of storing, transferring, visualising, and
querying historical data.

We believe that this project is a perfect example of how Digital Humanities,
through its interdisciplinary nature of binding together research in humanities
with digital technologies, can generate new critical knowledge through the
re-interpretation of data that might otherwise be obscured. In addition,
with the use of the latest open-source technology in spatial visualisation, the
project adds value to the field by providing a showcase of the evolution of
relevant technologies and, more importantly, the ways that Digital Humanities
can innovatively use them for research. Finally, the project has the potential
to offer a basis for a more ambitious project on a larger scale following the
successful completion of its first stage. The ultimate aim is to allow other
researchers to submit their data to the open-architected and forward-compatible
queryable mapping tool and provide a historically more accurate overview of the
intellectual movements during the Enlightenment.

