A Collaborative Approach

between Art History and

Literature via IIIF

Kiyonori Nagasaki

nagasaki@dhii.jp

International Institute for Digital Humanities, Japan

Tetsuei Tsuda

tsuda@tobunken.go.jp

Tokyo Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Japan

X. Jie Yang

xyang@ucalgary.ca

University of Calgary, Canada

Yuho Kitazaki

yuho.kitazaki@gmail.com

University of Tokyo, Japan

A. Charles Muller

acmuller@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp Univerisity of Tokyo, Japan

Masahiro Shimoda

shimoda@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp University of Tokyo, Japan

Introduction

This paper describes a collaborative approach of information exchange between
art history and literature via IIIF as conducted by two projects: the SAT

Daizokyo Text Database Committee (SAT) and a project to leverage an open
dataset of the National Institute of Japanese Literature. This approach is
technically similar to that used by previous projects such as TILE and TEI.
However, as it has not been easy for them to fully treat the binding of images
of a book between Web services, this approach adopts the IIIF (International
Image Interoperability Framework) so that both can connect easily and
efficiently. After explaining the distinctive aspects of both projects, we will
introduce a collaborative solution.

In May 2016, SAT released the SAT Taishozo Image DB (SATiDB), which includes
digital facsimiles of a series of Buddhist images and their interpretations
in the Taisho Tripitaka consisting of 12 volumes originally published in 1933.
SATiDB provides annotations for about 5,200 Buddhist icons (busson) and
symbols (sanmayagyd and mandala) in the books and several search functions of
the annotations with a simple translator from English to technical terms in CJK
characters via the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism. As the annotations use a
vocabulary of attributes of Buddhist icons, such as hair style, sitting style,
type of chair, possessions, etc., which was defined by this project due to the
absence of such a vocabulary in the source data, users can also search the
objects by clicking a checkbox of one or more term in a list form of the
vocabulary (Figure 1).

[185-1]

Figure 1. A search result of “burning hair”

As the system is compliant with IIIF, the images and annotations can be
leveraged in various ways, even from other web sites. SATiDB has a function to
expose several objects in parallel by clicking checkboxes of cropped images by
coordination of each object in the search results on the IIIF viewer, Mirador
(Figure 2).

[185-2]

Figure 2. Checked images are displayed in parallel.

The annotations were embedded by forty-three researchers in the field of
Japanese art history on a web collaboration system in 2015. We developed the
system utilizing RedHat Linux, Apache, PostgreSQL, PHP,

jQuery, and Annotorious, which enabled the easy annotation of images. The
annotations were stored in PostgreSQL including attributes such as date and
responsibility. After input, the data were converted into IIIF Presentation API
and distributed with hi-resolu-tion images converted from 60M-pixel images
delivered with IIIF Image API. This system provides researchers of Japanese art
history with a brand new function to see and compare Buddhist icons and
symbols. Many positive comments have been received from the researchers of
Japanese art history and the number of visitors of the site was over 12,000 in
the first month, but no papers have yet been produced explicitly using this
system.

The other project also developed a Web collaboration system to embed
transcription of Japanese texts (the issues of such transcription have been
described by Nagasaki et al, 2016) line-by-line in the style of IIIF annotation
which enables to search images as-they-are via Smart-GS. (Hashimoto et al,
2014) It adopts OpenSeaDragon and its plugins to annotate images with zooming
and has a function to convert them into the format of IIIF Presentation API. So
far, two premodern woodcut printing books written in cursive Japanese script
were completely done by two researchers and available via customized Mirador
for right-to-left viewing-direction and vertical texts (Figure 3).

[185-3]

Figure 3. Customized Mirador for right-to-left viewing-direction and vertical
texts

Finally, we explain the approach of linking both projects. As one of the two
transcribed woodcut printing books includes names of Buddhist saints, we
added tags on the names to trigger an event to search the name and prepare a
function to request queries to the SATiDB. On the other hand, in the SATiDB, a
function to distribute only a list of search results including images cropped
by IIIF Image API was implemented to pull search results from other Web sites
by use of a form of URL such as:

http://dzkimgs.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SATi/key:_keyword_

[185-4]

Figure 4. Search result of SATiDB by clicking a red-colored part of transcribed
text

As a result, readers- primarily researchers, but laypersons as well- can see
images of related Buddhist icons on SATiDB while reading the book. See Figure 4
to understand background of it. This is a typical solution of IIIF and easily
applicable for any environment in the digital humanities.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant

Numbers JP15H05725, JP16H03422.

