Access to DH Pedagogy as the Norm: Introducing Students to DH Methods Across
the Curriculum and at a Distance

Dan Tracy

dtracy@illinois.edu

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

Elizabeth Massa Hoiem

hoiem@illinois.edu

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

This poster presents research into integration and assessment of digital
humanities pedagogy in a distance course on the History of Children's
Literature, and provokes conversation about pedagogical approaches that expand
student access to DH methods, tools, and dispositions. Much of the existing
literature on DH pedagogy addresses methods courses or multimodal writing
courses rather than integration of DH practices in particular topical contexts,
or advanced topics courses that explore a narrow slice of disciplinary content
through extended engagements with digital projects (Ball 2012; Mostern & Gainor
2013; Fyfe 2016; Nyhan, Mahony, and Terras 2016). This literature provides
valuable lessons but raises questions about the feasibility of engaging with DH
across the curriculum in small-to-medium scale engagements with new methods and
technologies. Amy E. Earhart and Toniesha L. Taylor (2016), for example,
respond to this situation by rejecting the idea that DH should be limited to
advanced courses and propose broader integration of “embedded [DH] skills
development” that students can take out of the environment of a specific
institution. Similarly, we suggest that allowing for repeated and diverse
engagement by students across methods-intensive and topic-intensive courses (as
is now common for writing) is necessary for teaching deeper DH dispositions
like collaboration, openness to failure, and creativity with technology.

Simultaneously, the existing literature has focused on residential instruction
with access to physical artifacts. This limit is problematic when at least one
discipline with a heavy investment in DH, library and information science, is
well past transition to a majority distance learning population. LIS programs
have developed experience and expertise in teaching technology at a distance,
and lessons from these programs may be useful to the DH community. While some
teaching goals may only be met in person, others might be achieved through
well-structured online learning.

To ground this discussion, the authors, the course instructor, and a subject
librarian will present their development, assessment, and rethinking of a
multimodal publication assignment using the Scalar platform in a synchronous
online course on the History of Children's Literature. Students worked in
groups to create a multi-media web resource on “diverse history.” The class
discussed what is included or omitted from historical narratives, whether they
be children's historical fiction or history textbooks, before contemplating
this selection process in children's literature itself. The librarian
introduced students to the context of DH publishing and Scalar, and to issues
related to responsible use of multimedia. Then each group chose an issue
related to “diverse history” and built one section of the website. The
long-term goal is for successive classes to edit, revise, and expand this
project

This collaborative project replaced an assignment from previous years, when
students built individual websites about a children's book of their choice.
This project maximized scaffolding, with detailed guidance on information
students should locate about their books and the final website shape. This
iteration of the class took place during a time when distance students came to
campus one weekend each semester, and this time was used for in-depth
introduction to the array of specialized library resources needed to complete
the questions about their book's production and reception. The new assignment
sought to re-imagine learning outcomes that would allow students to engage with
a particular DH publishing technology, Scalar, and grapple with issues of
collaboration and multimodal authoring in a context where the final product was
less predetermined. Nonetheless, the elimination of the in person component,
which occurred at the same time, removed an obvious “lab” opportunity
for learning related technical issues. The pedagogical design involved making
the best balance between asynchronous and synchronous activities to
compensate for the absence of in person activities. Our evaluation of the
success of the assignment relied on assessment

of Scalar sample sites and final projects created by the students, as well as
on reflective essays written by the students and observations made in the
course of student consultations. This evaluation led to ideas for how to revise
the course for future semesters to improve learning of collaborative behaviors,
openness to failure, and creativity with technology. This includes, most
notably, a re-envisioning of how synchronous class time is used in the future.

By sharing our experiences in developing, teaching, assessing, and revising
this course in successive iterations, we hope to explore with attendees the
ways in which DH methods, tools, and dispositions can proliferate across the
curriculum. We will promote discussion of what DH methods, tools, and
dispositions can be taught well in different settings, whether that means
varying scales of integration in DH classrooms, or exploring what can be taught
virtually versus in person.

