Micro DH: Digital Humanities at the Small Scale

Roopika Risam

rrisam@salemstate.edu

Salem State University, United States of America

Susan Edwards

sedwards@salemstate.edu

Salem State University, United States of America

Digital humanities practices are often understood in terms of significant
scale: big data, large data sets, digital humanities centers (Terras et al.
2016; Kowalczyk et al. 2014; Borgman 2009; Kretzschmar 2009). This emphasis
leads to the perception that projects cannot be completed without
substantial access to financial resources, data, and labor (Prescott 2016;
Hockey 2016; Evans and Rees 2012). While this can be the case, such
presumptions serve as a deterrent to the development of an inclusive
digital humanities community with representation across academic hierarchies
(student, librarian, faculty), types of institutions (public, private,
regional), and geographies (Global North, Global South). In response, how can
digital humanities scholars find value in work undertaken at a small scale?
This question is at the heart of this paper theorizing the practices of micro
digital humanities by reporting on initiatives at Salem State University. These
practices include the embrace of minimal computing, small data sets,
local archives, and freely available platforms for creating small-scale digital
humanities projects while working with undergraduate students.

The work of the Minimal Computing Working Group has articulated a vision for
minimal forms of digital humanities praxis (Minimal Computing Working Group
2015). Jentery Sayers (2016) has identified key components of minimal
computing, including minimal design, maximum justice, and minimal technical
language. These principles privilege access and openness for stakeholders
across economic and technical barriers. More importantly, they are
precepts that envision how digital humanities practices might be available to
those who work outside of macro structures that have historically shaped
digital humanities. This has been important at Salem State, a regional, public
university undergoing an unprecedented budget crisis due to funding cuts from
the state legislature. However, we have faculty and librarians who are
committed to using digital humanities to cultivate digital and 21st century
literacies in our students. As a result, we have conceptualized a micro digital
humanities approach inspired by minimal computing. Micro DH validates scholarly
output that does not require digital humanities centers, big data, large data
sets, and access to high-performance computing. As an intervention in local
digital humanities, it places high value on working with available resources,
however small.

At Salem State, we have embraced micro digital humanities through our work with
undergraduates. This talk explores these practices in depth, as a model for
claiming the legitimacy of small-scale digital humanities. It considers how we
have drawn on minimal university resources and existing institutional
structures to build a digital humanities community.

First, the focus of our work is our university’s archives and special
collections, a diverse and free but untapped source of material. This choice
emphasizes the primacy of local resources in micro digital humanities. Although
Salem is known for its history of the Salem Witch Trials and literature of
Nathaniel Hawthorne, our archives focus on the common person’s experience in
Salem from the mid-19th century to present. This includes a rich history of
immigration and activism. It exemplifies the power of micro digital humanities
for the diversifying the historical record by giving voice to the ordinary and
everyday. Through our work, we shed light on the hidden histories that shape
Salem today.

We undertake this work in service of our undergraduate students. Micro digital
humanities is an approach that cuts across hierarchies in academic labor,
bringing faculty, librarians, and students together to create small projects.
Salem State is the most diverse state university in Massachusetts (35% students
of color, 40% first-generation college students) and draws a primarily
regional, working-class student population. Both the students and the
university have few resources, but we work with what we have. To serve this
population, we developed the Digital Scholars Program, piloted through a small
grant from the university. We designed the program to answer the call of the
university’s strategic plan to foster student success through research
opportunities. Students apply to become Digital Scholars, and those who
are selected are mentored through the process of creating a small-scale digital
humanities project over the course of a semester.

Because they receive course credit rather than payment, we do not believe that
we can, ethically, ask students to work on projects for us. Instead, the
program is student-centered and student-led through a scaled down approach
emphasizing the creation of micro projects. We select collections for the
students to explore related to the history of Salem State then lead them
through the experience of creating a digital humanities project from start to
stopping point. The process includes making discoveries in the
archives, identifying research questions that suit their interests, curating
materials, envisioning project design, selecting platforms, and creating a
final product - and all the iterative dimensions this process entails. Students
also have access to professional development workshops and opportunities to
engage with guest speakers who are themselves digital humanities practitioners.
Projects our students have undertaken include recovering the history of LGBTQ
activism at the university, revealing the colonialist gaze of Salem residents
who traveled to India in the 1920s, creating historical models of the
university’s oldest campus building, and connecting contemporary student
activism around Black Lives Matter to the history of antiracist activism at the
university in the 1970s. These projects have helped students engage in a range
of practices: digitizing texts, TEI, Omeka, 3D modeling, quantitative textual
analysis, data visualization, and oral history. In the spirit of micro digital
humanities, we only use freely available resources or open source software we
can host ourselves. This is a response to our lack of financial resources but
is also a result of our focus on students; we do not want to force them to use
proprietary technologies they may not be able to afford to access outside of a
university or on their own.

We situate this work as a practice of micro digital humanities, cutting across
hierarchies to shift students from the position of consumer of digital
media and technologies to the role of producer. This requires setting aside our
preferences for what projects based on the collections should look like and
recognizing that students will be working at a small scale. However, we view
these small projects as pieces of a bigger puzzle that illuminates life in
Salem. To bring these projects together, we developed an umbrella digital
humanities project called Digital Salem, a portal that aggregates student
projects by collection. Users visiting Digital Salem are offered multiple ports
of entry into the history, culture, and literature of Salem. There, the small
student projects add up as they contribute to a rich, varied resource on Salem.
This experience has suggested how a micro digital humanities can be designed
with emphasis connecting small projects as modular pieces that work together to
form a bigger picture.

These micro digital humanities practices have been the foundation of the
digital humanities community at the university. They have brought
together faculty, librarians, and students to facilitate student research at a
teaching-intensive university. Further, they offer a model for developing
digital humanities at scales appropriate to institutional contexts
and strategic planning. Perhaps more importantly, they offer a vision of
digital humanities with learning curves and barriers to entry that do not
require affiliation with centers, access to expensive technologies, or
substantial resources. This, we argue, is essential to the development of an
inclusive digital humanities community.

