Facilitating Fine-grained Open Annotations of Scholarly Sources

Peter Boot

peter.boot@huygens.knaw.nl

Huygens ING, The Netherlands

Ronald Haentjens Dekker

ronald.dekker@huygens.knaw.nl

Huygens ING, The Netherlands

Marijn Koolen

marijn.koolen@huygens.knaw.nl

Huygens ING, The Netherlands

Liliana Melgar

melgar@uva.nl

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Introduction

In the scholarly domain, annotation is a fundamental activity (Unsworth, 2000).
Current web-based annotation facilities enable a specific way of annotation
(via note-taking, highlighting or commenting) which are useful when scholars
are exploring or gathering an initial set of resources, but more sophisticated
support is needed for detailed analysis, close reading, and data enrichment. At
this point, it is important to take into account the structural relations
between documents and their parts. For example, when annotating a
letter, annotation tools should be aware that a targeted text fragment is the
name of the sender, or that the annotation of a film targets the intellectual
work instead of the specific version or copy on which the annotation is made.

In addition, many standalone tools use annotation models with idiosyncratic
solutions to enable the relations between different media objects and
their parts, which limits the possibilities to exchange those annotations . In
general, there is a lack of necessary details for durable access to and
interpretation of annotations. For this, detailed information is needed about
the annotated object, the annotator and the annotation itself (Melgar et al.
2016, Walkowski &

Barker, 2010). In this paper we focus on the requirements for the annotated
object, in a web-based environment, and propose a method for making necessary
details of objects openly available for any annotation tool.

Requirements of scholarly annotation

In line with (W3C 2017b) we refer to the object that is annotated as the
annotation target, the content of the annotation as the annotation body and who
or what creates the annotation as the annotation creator. All three are complex
entities with aspects that have consequences for interpreting an annotation
(Melgar et al., 2016).

Annotation Creator: With respect to the creator it is important to know
the intention/motivation for making the annotation (Walkowski & Barker, 2010)
and when sharing and reusing annotations, their level of expertise, both
in terms of the scholarly domain and in the nature of the annotation task (e.g.
the amount of experience/expertise of the annotator in classifying objects
according to a controlled vocabulary).

Annotation target: of the target it is important to know which part of the
object is targeted. This is not merely about addressing media fragments. Media
(e.g., html, mp3, jpg) are carriers of abstract information objects (scenes in
movies, chapters in books, objects in pictures) with different conceptual
levels (e.g. work, expression or manifestation , see Figure 1) and it is
essential to be able to address those abstract objects and the relationships
between them.

Annotation body: Of the content of the annotation it is important to know its
nature (a natural language comment, structural or subject metadata, a link to
another resource), in what form it is made (e.g. closed representation or
natural language representation), at what level of control (from mostly
uncontrolled to strictly controlled and structured) and for what scholarly
purpose, e.g. gathering or exploring sources or thematic or stylistic analysis
(Melgar et al., 2017).

State of the Art

There are various models for capturing digital annotations to make them
accessible and interpretable. The Web Annotation Data Model (W3C 2017a, 2017b)
is a generic model that covers aspects of the annotation body, target and
creator. This model focuses on annotations in the context of online
social interaction (e.g., commenting, sharing), not necessarily on scholarly
annotations done during analysis or data enrichment .

An extended model specifically for scholarly research was proposed by Hunter et
al. (2011), which includes context aspects for both the annotation body and
target. The Annotating All Knowledge Coalition is also directed at scholarly
annotation and lists several issues, including:

1.    The lack of support for discovery, sharing and reuse of annotations.

2.    Underutilization of collections.

3.    The closed and non-standardized nature of current annotation tools.

Current annotation support is either part of a suite of functionalities in
monolithic applications with their own models for annotation (e.g. TextGrid ,
Textual Communities , eLaborate , CATMA for text,Elan and Anvil for multimedia
materials, and QDA software packages for mixed media qualitative data
analysis), or they lack specificity in describing the annotation target, e.g. 
Hypothes.is (Perkel, 2015) and Pundit (Grassi et al., 2012) and site-specific
annotation tools, e.g. in The Diary of Samuel Pepys).

[198-1]

Figure 1. Conceptual model of annotated object (details of other parts of the
model are left out for clarity)

Building on earlier work (Melgar et al., 2016), in this paper we argue the need
for application support for more specificity of the annotation target
(see Figure 1). We identify two additional issues with the current
state-of-the-art:

4.    The W3C annotation protocol lacks support for a potential annotation
target identifying and describing itself to the annotation tool.

5.    The model also lacks a schema, which would allow scholars or website
maintainers to define constraints for a specific class of annotations that is
applicable in the context of a specific group of scholarly objects.

Use case: annotation in scholarly digital editions

These issues are illustrated by a scenario of a digital scholarly edition where
scholars have a need for annotation support (Boot, 2009, Robinson,
2004, Siemens et al., 2012). Consider an edition that wants to incorporate an
external annotation tool into its pages (Figure 2): an edition server shows an
edition to a client in a browser. The annotation client runs within that same
browser window, but doesn’t know about the edition’s structure and it talks
with its own server. To communicate intelligently with the user, the annotation
client needs information about the structure of the edition, which has to be
provided by the edition.

The annotation tool should know about the edition’s structure for a number of
reasons:

•    The edition often contains multiple representations of the same text
fragment. There might be a diplomatic and a critical transcription, one or more
translations, audio versions, and who knows what other versions, and
annotations made in one of these should be available in others;

•    Other sites may have other editions of this particular text. It should be
possible to exchange annotations between them;

•    The edition has an internal structure, e.g. a book divided in chapters, or
the fragments appearing in modern authors’ drafts, or the elaborate structure
with multiple apparatuses of some editions of medieval texts. An annotation
that refers to a specific component of an edition should be able to address
that component and know what sort of component it is.

• The edition should be able to propose suitable annotation types for
its components. For personal names, it might suggest an annotation type that
links the person to an authority file. For transcriptions, there might be
special annotation types for proposed corrections to the transcription. Edition
collaboratories could use the annotation functionality to solicit multiple
sorts of specialised information from its collaborators.

This proposal requires that: (i) the edition describes itself and its structure
to the annotation tool, and provides suitable labels for the
annotatable objects; (ii) the edition can suggest annotation types for the
annotatable objects; (iii) the effort to integrate annotation functionality in
existing editions is minimal; (iv) the annotation tool is generic, but able
to handle the created annotations with awareness of the structure that they
apply to (it can e.g. return aggregated annotations); (v) the annotation
targets are durable and not formulated in terms of HTML structure; and (vi)
URI's should be treated as opaque (i.e., we shouldn't try to guess the
relations between the annotated components based on their URIs); and lastly
(vii) URIs should be canonical.

Proposed Solution

We propose a solution similar to Schema.org (an initiative for adding
structural semantics to information on the web) whereby descriptive information
about annotatable resources is made accessible to the client by embedding it in
the HTML presentation layer through RDFa attributes (Figure 3), using an
extensible resource descriptive ontology. Figure 4 shows a basic ontology for
text objects (left half of Figure 4) with an edition-specific extension for the
example edition (right half of Figure 4). This ontology shares concepts with
the FRBRoo ontology (Bekiari et al., 2015) but starts from
specific annotation-related concepts. In future work we will investigate
extending the ontology with FRBRoo concepts.

Although this approach is focused on annotation of resources on the web, the
same principle could be applied in offline annotation, if the offline
resources are described in a similar way and annotation clients are developed
to make use of this. Also, descriptive information for textual sources can be
embedded as markup, but for audiovisual documents, this has to be done via a
separate representation, for instance using SMIL (Bulterman et al., 2008).

<body vocab-'http://huygens.knaw.nl/ns/annotate#CvsabflUX-'um:vangogh :let633"

<span property-'b&sXwe," content="Letter/>

<h4 resource^'y^j^&eakS&tC&SJiS^^    P rope rty^'jsEaaQf >

<span property-'basZXRe." content-'Correspondence''>Van Gogh. The Letters</
span>

</h4>

<p resource="ujBJiaBiWaM^et633:par.1"    property="Uas5iUt">

<span property="J3&§Jyg£" content="Paragraph"/>Mon sijgjBemard -

</p>

<p resource-'ujjKyaJW>ab,:let633:note.1'' type&t-'Enrichment"
property-'baa£nofituufiut;'> <span property-'Jj&gJypg" content="Note"/>

<p resource="ujBJiaB&J3aMet633:page.1" iyRe&t-'X&xtBeaxe/ property=
"jaGawieitQo.">

<span property-'basZXRe." content="Page"/>

Figure 3. HTML fragments of a letter of Vincent van Gogh (http://
vangoghletters.org/orig/let633) described by embedded RDFa. The letter is
identified by a URN (urn:vangogh:let633) and defined as a CreativeWork. It
is part of a larger CreativeWork, Van Go

[198-2]

Figure 4. Basic ontology for text objects (left of dashed line) and extended
ontology for Van Gogh Letters Collection (right of dashed line). The basic
ontology recognizes three types of annotatable things: the creative work being
edited and its parts (also creative works), the text bearers (e.g. manuscript
pages), and editorial enrichment of any sort. Projects can create an extended
ontology to suit their needs. The extended ontology shown here creates
specialized classes for the needs of the Van Gogh letter edition (http://
vangoghletters.org/).

Methodological impact

In our proposal annotatable resources describe their own semantic structure,
thereby facilitating finegrained annotations. With the RDFa
attributes, annotation clients can identify the annotation target in terms of
the resource structure (issue 4), which makes annotations less dependent on
specific views on the underlying object. Furthermore, this allows development
of lightweight open source annotation clients that web services can easily
embed to bring annotation to collections of scholarly interest (issue 3).

This makes it easier for scholars to use and reuse annotations to support the
argument made in a scholarly article (issue 1). It allows
distinguishing different groups of annotations, so researchers can choose to
display certain groups of annotations, thereby avoiding being drowned by
irrelevant annotations (issue 5). It facilitates employing annotation
functionality to ask for targeted comments on resource parts (what do you think
of this translation? What clarification of this material are you missing?).
Scholars can also more meaningfully combine and compare them across collections
and media types, e.g. analyse the correspondence between book and film versions
of an intellectual work (issue 2).

If the annotations are consistently stored using open protocols, it becomes
possible to reference them in scholarly publications. Collateral benefit of
floating this form of ‘deep web’ semantics to the surface is that other
external services such as search engines can also use the exposed semantic
information to reason about available resources.

