Multimode and Multilevel: Vertical Dimension in Historical and
Literary Networks

Martin Grandjean

martin.grandjean@unil.ch

University of Lausanne, Switzerland

Introduction

In the field of global history, especially when it comes to « histoire croisée
», the use of metaphors describing the vertical organization of a society,
its structuration into layers or into overlapping systems, is common. The
temptation to use a second metaphor, calling everything a “network”, is also
very important in this domain, whose objects of study are often transnational
organizations with multiple branches, intertwined within umbrella
organizations, sharing board members and including several levels
of secretariats and subcommittees (Grandjean 2017). However, the use of these
images is not limited to historical studies, since we use the same vocabulary
in other disciplines to describe social situations or textual structures.

When we go beyond the metaphor to develop a formal analysis, we often produce
multigraphs who, because they simultaneously express horizontal and vertical
relationships, are generally unsuitable for the analysis (and visualisation,
except in very simple cases). If the “exploratory” dimension of social network
analysis - and especially the fact that its display is relatively subjective -
is often a subject of criticism, we propose here to play with the
visual representation to show precisely how an original modelling can improve
the reading of complex graphs, and helping to restore a “morphological”
(Moretti 1999, 68) information where disorder seems to prevail.

Based on two examples from archives mapping and theatre character networks,
this paper proposes a reflection on the different ways to take account
of verticality in graphs. In particular, we are developing a way to impose a
macro-structure to a network, allowing a two-dimensions view that reflects
the hierarchical affiliations of its components. We will see that this method,
by constructing a stable visual representation in time and space, helps to
compare different types of relationships and/or different time states of the
graph.

Network levels

What is evident in an affiliation network is not always explicit in other
situations, but a multimode graph is always the expression of a form of
multilevel network (Lazega and Snijders 2016). For instance, there is an
implicit hierarchy among the committees level and the level of individuals
within them. It is thus easy to imagine such networks as superimposed layers,
linked by the vertical affiliation links. And this analysis is obviously
interesting because these vertical links are not the only ones to influence the
model structure: committees in the upper stratum may themselves be organized
into their own horizontal structure, as well as individuals, in the lower
stratum, can weave relationship regardless of the structure of the committees
to which they belong. This kind of macro/micro-structure comparison is not new
in sociology: through sociometric approaches of urban social structures, for
example, some address the organization of metropolitan communities
together with that of interpersonal relationships (Laumann 1973). This raises
the issue of representing these networks within a two-dimensional plane, e.g.
by changes in the colour and shape of the markers (Wang et al. 2016), or by an
artificial transfer of the upper-level in a region of the graph that enables
them to be read (Zappa and Lomi 2015). When the low complexity of networks
allows, some may also use three-dimensional representations, clearly
indicating the superimposed planes (Brailly and Lazega 2012).

[202-1]

Figure 1. Multilevel system of networks where individuals having personal
relationships (C) and exchanging documents (D) are affiliated to institutions
(B) themselves hierarchically organized (A). E, F and G visualize in 2D
the vertical relationships expressed in 3D left.

The model: projecting structure on relations

Fig. 1 visually explains a relatively simple multilevel graph, with four levels
of actors (documents D, exchanged by individuals C belonging to subinstitutions
B themselves grouped by top-institutions A) and five different types of
relationships, including three vertical. This example depicts an institution,
but it can be exported in a wide variety of domains : it may well be a medieval
family network (C) in villages (B) under the authority of lordships (A), and
sharing agricultural properties (D). Or theatre characters having friendship
relations (C), organized in groups (B) and appearing together in scenes (D). In
these examples, we see very concretely how the 2-mode graph express vertical
relationships.

Secondly, we proceed to a flattening of the hierarchical structure of the two
upper levels as sets containing the elements to be studied (here, individuals),
as in Fig. 2 (I). Now it is no longer the horizontal relationships between
individuals (C) that affect the display of the graph but these sets, fixed
once and for all.

Creating a stable spatialization is the condition for a comparative analysis:
we can therefore display side by side the graph of document exchanges (J,
product by projecting G as a 1-mode graph of individuals) and the graph of
interpersonal relations (I), without a reorganization of nodes that would make
the hierarchy unreadable.

[202-2]

Figure 2. To reduce the complexity of a multigraph and allow a comparative
analysis of different types of relationships, we gather the micro-level
relations (I and J) in the macro-level structure. Here, we therefore compare
interinstitutional relations (H), the personal relations of the individuals (K)
and the documents exchanged between them (L), all summarized in
sub-institutional level.

Then we move to the upper level by summarizing the individual relationships as
relations between the groups they belong to. We can now compare
the institutional relation between these groups (H) with personal relationships
(K) and the exchange of documents (L). In our example, we see that the patterns
are very different, even though a majority of relationships logically occur
within the subinstitutions (see self-edges in K and L).

Applications

When Sampson, in the central square of Verona, calls his colleague Gregory,
also a servant in the Capulet family, he creates the first edge of
the character network of Shakespeare's tragedy « Romeo and Juliet » (for more
discussion of the study of character networks, see Trilke et al. 2015 and
Xanthos et al. 2016). The readability of the interaction graph of this
introductory scene, the confrontation of the two hostile houses, is greatly
enhanced by a highlight of these vertical relationships (Fig. 3), the
affiliations of all the protagonists to family identities that will structure
the plot.

[202-3]

House of

•    Montague

Figure 3. The character network of Shakespeare's tragedy “Romeo and Juliet”
(Grandjean 2015). Two characters are connected if they appear simultaneously in
a scene. On the left, the network is spatialized with a classical
force-directed

algorithm, and on the right by imposing a “family geography”) (family in the
inner circle, servants in the outer circle).

In the context of more complex networks, where it is less about creating a new
visual and pedagogical artifact to facilitate narratological studies than to
find a way to automate pattern detection, we will also discuss the case of
network analysis of large archive corpora (Grandjean 2014). In this case (Fig.
4), we will show in particular that it is possible to detect individuals that
bypass institutional hierarchy, when horizontal relationships do not align with
vertical affiliations.

[202-4]

Figure 4. Cooccurrences network of more than 3,000 scientists and diplomats in
the 30,000 documents of the “International Commission on Intellectual
Cooperation” of

the League of Nations (archives 1919-1927). On the left, the network
spatialized with a force-directed algorithm, and on the right spatialized by
imposing a vertical hierarchy, flattening the affiliation of each individual in
a kind of “institutional geography (Grandjean 2016).

Grandjean, M. (2014). La connaissance est un réseau: perspective sur
l'organisation archivistique et encyclopédique, Les Cahiers du Numérique, 10,
3, pp. 37-54.

Grandjean, M. (2015). Network visualization: mapping

Shakespeare's tragedies, http://www.mar-

tingrandjean.ch/network-visualization-shakespeare/ (ac

cessed on 1st October 2016).

Grandjean, M. (2016). Archives Distant Reading : Mapping the Activity of the
League of Nation's Intellectual Cooperation, Digital Humanities 2016:
Conference Abstracts, pp. 531-534.

Grandjean, M. (2017). Strutture complesse e organizza-zioni internazionali.
Analisi e visualizzazioni delle reti in storia : l'esempio della cooperazione
intellettuale della So-cietà delle Nazioni, Memoria e Ricerca, 25, 2.

Laumann, E. O. (1973). Bonds of Pluralism: The Form and

Substance of Urban Social Net

works, New York, Wiley and Sons.

Lazega, E. and Snijders, T.A.B. (2016). Multilevel Network Analysis for the
Social Sciences, Springer.

Moretti, F. (1999). Atlas of the European Novel, 1800-1900,

Verso Books.

Trilcke, P., Fischer, F. and Kampkaspar, D. (2015). Digital Network Analysis of
Dramatic Texts. Digital Humanities 2015, http://dh2015.org/ab-

stracts/xml/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_Analy-

sis_of_Dramati/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_Analy-

sis_of_Dramatic_Text.html

(accessed on 1st October 2016).

Wang P., Robins G., Pattison P. and Lazega E. (2016). Social selection models
for multilevel networks, Social Networks, 44, pp. 346-362.

Xanthos A. Pante I., Rochat Y. and Grandjean M. (2016). Visualising the
Dynamics of Character Networks, Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts,
pp. 417-419.

Zappa, P. and Lomi, A. (2015). The Analysis of Multilevel Networks in
Organizations: Models and Empirical Tests,

Organizational Research Methods, 18, 3, pp. 542-569.

