Digital Access as an Equity Issue: The Community College and the Digital Divide

Polly Ruth Hoover

phoover@ccc.edu

Wright College, United States of America

In her nuanced discussion of teenagers and their use of digital technology,
danah boyd argues that there are far-reaching consequences for assuming
that young students are naturally digitally savvy and older adults are
digitally hampered; we assume younger students are digital natives adept at
using and understanding technology, while adults are digital immigrants, still
learning the language and culture of the digital world (2014: 176-193). In
fact, “Familiarity with the latest gadgets or services is often less important
than possessing the critical knowledge to engage productively with networked
situations, including the ability to control how personal information flows and
how to look for and interpret accessible information” (boyd, 2014: 180), and
she further cautions that “access to technology should not be conflated with
use” (boyd, 2014:192).

But access is not universal. Even among teenagers, there are different levels
of participation because of the access to the technology, the quality of the
access related to the socioeconomic status of the teenager and the consequent
different levels of digital skills (See Hargittai, 2008). While young,
wealthier students may have access without sufficient knowledge about the
limitations and challenges of their digital access, students from lower
socioeconomic groups may not even have access except through the
technology provided by their schools, libraries and other local institutions.
The economic divide contributes to the digital divide.

This digital divide is further exacerbated by the institutional divisions and
economic resources between two-year comprehensive community colleges and
four-year institutions. Anne B. McGrail, a community college instructor
herself, in her discussion of the role digital humanities might play in the
community colleges, asks “What are community colleges and their students
missing out on in their exclusion from DH discourse, and how might intentional
engagement with DH methods and tools help community college students become
active agents of discovery and change in their lives?” (McGrail, 2016). These
questions are particularly pointed given that many of the students at
the comprehensive community colleges intend to transfer to four-year
institutions and see the two-year colleges as an affordable first entry into
college. If digital humanities is “the next big thing” as William Pannapacker
announced in his 2010 blog in The Chronicle of Higher Education, is digital
access another inequity in the system of higher education?

But how are digital access and inequality linked? At traditional four-year
institutions, instructors may find the digital divide initially a challenge
because of the access that students have had prior to their matriculation, but
once they are enrolled, the institution provides digital access and support
for both students and instructors. The learning curve may be steep for some
students, but there are footholds on the way up. At the community colleges,
however, which typically enrolls a variety of diverse students, a range from
nontraditional students, who may be returning students apprehensive about their
abilities, who may be limited in time and financial resources, and who are less
likely to have access to or to use digital technology, to the more traditional
students who nevertheless do not have the economic resources to access the
newest digital resources, the digital divide begins at enrollment and may
continue after enrollment. Both groups may be under-prepared, under-resourced
and have issues of persistence. Yet, contrary to the four-year institutional
model, the divide is further complicated because community colleges and their
instructors, many of whom are adjuncts with peripatetic careers, are also
underresourced and lacking strong support for the digital humanities. The
digital divide begins at enrollment and continues even after enrollment.

This presentation directly addresses these issues of digital access and equity
among community college students. In particular, I examine the implications
of the digital divide among the community college population: the problems of
access and use among community college students both before and after
they enroll, the different levels and aspects of digital preparedness for
students, instructors and administrators, and the institutional issues of
support and resources to create robust digital humanities at the comprehensive
community college. I discuss in

detail academic planning and creation of institutional support including
establishment of Makerspaces and digital labs, professional development
opportunities for faculty, and the creation of assignments that address some of
these issues.

