Decolonizing Methodologies: Recovery and Access Amidst the Ruins

Christy Hyman

christy@huskers.unl.edu

University of Nebraska-Lincoln

United States of America

Anelise Shrout

ashrout@fullerton.edu

California State University-Fullerton, United States of America

Kathryn Kaczmarek-Frew

kkaczmar@umd.edu

University of Maryland, United States of America

Hilary Green

hngreen1@ua.edu

University of Alabama, United States of America

Nishani Frazier

frazien@miamioh.edu

Miami University, United States of America

Brian Rosenblum

brianlee@ku.edu

University of Kansas, United States of America

“It was as if these matters of objective and hard science provided an oasis for
folks who did not want to clutter sharp, disciplined, methodical philosophy
with considerations of gender, race and class-determined facts of life”
(Earhart 2012, pg. 5).

“There is something truly soul-destroying in the repeated discursive erasure of
vulnerable identities whether in the media, on the street, in the classroom, or
in the legislative chamber” (Wright 2015, 264).

Recent instances involving the desecration of hallowed structures erected in
remembrance of turbulent periods in the U.S. solidify the need for a call to
action to enact historical recovery amidst the “ruins.” The ruins include the
marginalization of subaltern agents within grand historical narratives, the
propensity of the academy to view historical purveyors of intellectual thought
as overwhelmingly European, and the invisibility of subaltern agents
in traditional and digital archives. Sites of subaltern experience drift in and
out of the historical record often leaving no tangible signifiers to how these
events inform the racialized, gendered, and class based systems of power which
influenced many of the negotiations that subaltern agents contended with
in initiating action and decision-making in an oppressive world. Historical
recovery in the digital humanities play a vital role in enabling users with
access to new knowledge as well as helping to shape meaning and interpretation
of the cataclysmic phenomena embedded within its mediums. Anelise Shrout’s
call for history from below is essential to creating digital content which
enables accessibility and users potentiality of increased awareness of the
historical underpinnings related to structural inequality- Shrout rightly
declares that digital methodologies are ideally suited for these interventions
(Shrout 2016).

This panel offers several approaches to historical recovery through showcasing
digital projects which utilize technologies designed to foreground
subaltern histories while preserving contextual integrity. We bring together
three approaches- geospatial, alternate reality gaming, and online digital
collections for a conversation that will highlight the methods and values
involved in the digitization, visualization, user interaction and theoretical
analysis of content. Our panel consists of scholars who’ve
developed interdisciplinary approaches in their area of inquiry emphasizing
historical recovery as a focal point of their research: Anelise Shrout’s
presentation explores the Digital Almshouse Project and argues for
the importance of digital humanists bringing together new archival methods with
the old while critically reading archival silences as opportunities for
further recovery and analysis. Christy Hyman’s presentation highlights the ways
that GIS recovers subaltern experience through the struggles of
enslaved runaways in antebellum eastern North Carolina using the digital
narrative The Oak of Jerusalem: Flight, Refuge, and Reconnaissance in the Great
Dismal Swamp Region. Hilary Green’s paper examines digital collections
alongside pedagogical approaches that introduce students to centering
historically subaltern actors using intersectional strategies and
inclusive pedagogies. Kathryn Kaczmarek-Frew illuminates opportunities
available with alternate reality games in building adolescent’s historical
knowledge by showcasing The Tessera, a game inspiring teens to take on the
roles of real life scientists, programmers, and artists as they solve
conceptual challenges while immersing themselves in a storyworld.
Finally, Nishani Frazier discusses the conflictual relationship between the
academy and the digital, the changing role of the scholar/expert, the
importance of community in historical production, and the balance needed
between recovery and shared authority.

In doing so, this panel promises to stimulate a lively and engaging discussion
that will be informative to digital humanists of many fields. By
presenting content and methods that connect subaltern humanity to recovery
methods within the digital this panel helps forge the way for future work in
gaining access to a more public facing scholarship that foregrounds
the marginalized stories, agents, and actors into the digital humanities.

All panelists have agreed to participate.

Rehumanizing Data: Digital Methods Against Archival Violence

Anelise Shrout

Some of the most interesting historical subjects left only the faintest traces
in the archive (Shrout 2016). When people of color, enslaved people, immigrants
or women appear at all, it is often as commodified figures, ancillaries to
those in power, or as undifferentiated masses of undesirable bodies. Scholars
have recently begun to note that the archival silencing of these marginalized
voices is not merely oversight, but rather, as Marisa Fuentes argues, a kind of
epistemic violence. (Fuentes 2016). The absence of these subjects, these
scholars note, is a feature, rather than a bug.

This presentation proposes a set of digital humanities practices that
explicitly work against the structures that kept those voices silent in the
first place. It uses Digital Almshouse Project, a dataset of Irish immigrant
who emigrated to North America to the port of New York in the 1840s. These men
and women subsequently fell ill, became destitute, or were simply seen to be
incompatible with New York’s public spaces. They were identified by public
officials and sent (often forcibly) to New York’s Bellevue Almshouse - the only
public health site that offered social services to people fleeing famine. In
the process they were transformed; their diseases (a category which included
the social maladies “recent emigrant” and “destitute”), their children (who
they would often be separated from inside the almshouse) and the spaces of
confinement to which they were sent transmuted from individual experience
into bureaucratic data.

This presentation uses the Digital Almshouse Project to rehumanize
nineteenth-century immigrants. In doing so, it illustrates the ways in which
scholars can bring “big data” analysis to bear on silenced voices; can use data
visualization to resurrect archival ghosts; and can deploy quantitative
analysis to give weight to historical actors long since written out of history.
It asks that data-driven digital humanists pay particular attention to
historical actors whose bodies were quantified and commodified, and who were in
the process stripped of markers of humanity. Finally, it highlights historical
bureaucratic spaces in which immigrants were able to enact agency, while also
laying bare the ways in which the carceral state has used data to dehumanize
marginalized subjects.

The methods discussed in this presentation have roots in “history from below,”
the “new social history” and cliometrics of the 1970s and 1980 (Gallman
1977, Shammas 1977, Darnton, 1984). Together, these methods sought to resurrect
the stories of “people with no history,” by reconstructing their
quotidian experiences. However, the subjects of these studies tended to only be
relatively marginalized - they included (white, male) artisans, (white, male)
voters, and (white) women property holders. There have been various resurgences
and developments in these methods in the intervening four decades.
These include practices of reading archives “against the grain” to get at the
unstated assumptions that historical actors made about those they held
power over. They also include theoretical approaches that advocate the reading
of silences to understand those whose voices were intentionally obscured by
official recorders and gatekeepers (Trouillot 1995, Bastian 2003, Drake 2016).
This presentation argues that we must bring together new archival methods and
the old cliometrics; that we must critically read archival silences while
simultaneously using regression models to coerce meaning from our data; that
we should think about the motives of historical data creators, while we also
use dataviz to trace historical actors’ pathways through hostile spaces.
This presentation aims to not only theorize digital approaches to marginalized
people, but to present a concrete toolkit for beginning to center the voices
and experiences of those marginalized historical subjects.

GIS as a Phenomenological Bridge to Experience: Deep Mapping the
Enslaved Runaways of Eastern North Carolina

Christy Hyman

My paper examines African American efforts toward cultural and political
assertion in geographies of domination, specifically the Great Dismal
Swamp area and adjacent communities in North Carolina during the long
nineteenth century. Building on the work of archaeologists, historians, and
novelists, my presentation reimagines space as it relates to the experiences of
enslaved runaways and laborers who were exposed to the Great Dismal Swamp. I
argue that the proximity of the Great Dismal Swamp increased the incidence of
flight despite the danger and overall inhospitable nature of that landscape. In
examining African Americans who navigated the landscapes of trauma inherent in
the institution of slavery within the eastern North Carolina region, this study
sheds light on the common values, aspirations, culture, and economic systems of
a people relegated to the margins of society. This investigation into the
spatial dimensions of flight within the Great Dismal Swamp, with the use of
historical primary sources, generates new knowledge about the enslaved
experience. This approach highlights and analyzes space itself with a view to
uncovering the social relationships embedded in it.

Focusing on enslaved runaways' proximity to waterways and the natural
environment within the Great Dismal Swamp, this project uses Esri Story Maps to
tell the digital narrative of The Oak of Jerusalem: Flight Refuge and
Reconnaissance in the Great Dismal Swamp Region, a project containing maps
with narrative text, images, and multimedia content. The data contained within
this digital narrative was gathered from nineteenth-century North
Carolina newspapers such as the Cape Fear Mercury, Carolina Observer, Edenton
Gazette, and many others which provided information on the destinations
and distributions of enslaved runaways, including frequency distribution of
enslaved runaways by month of disappearance and gender specificity. In terms of
the Great Dismal Swamp landscape, content will include remote sensing data,
forest dynamics of the swamp, soil characteristics, and animal species such as
amphibians, reptiles and mammals. Taking these physical properties of space
together with the historical descriptions of enslaved runaway ads
and cross-referencing this information with textual descriptions in the
enslaved narratives written by

Moses Grandy and Harriet Jacobs, a complete reality of what was at stake for an
enslaved person to run away emerges. Because these seemingly disparate
elements of space (and the social relationships embedded within) are scattered
across the archival landscape, my project brings all these things together in
one setting.

Geospatial technologies are central to this study because of the ways that GIS
can be a phenomenological bridge between subaltern experience and measurable
qualities of the Great Dismal Swamp landscape. Using geoprocessing methods
employed with ArcGis tools a cost surface was developed to investigate the ways
enslaved people appropriated the landscape into areas of refuge and
reconnaissance and eventual escape. A cost surface is a geospatial technique
based on measuring the effort it takes to cross a landscape area.
Data contained within a DEM (Digital Elevation Model) representing the Great
Dismal Swamp landscape allows for this form of spatial analysis. The
cost surface can thus be used to find the path between identified points along
the surface with the least amount of effort. In measuring “cost” for
enslaved people during the antebellum era four sets of variables were attained:

1.    Cumulative distance- total distance to travel from one place to another

2.    Duration or travel time- total time to travel from one place to another

3.    Energetic expenditures or calories- total calories expended to travel
from one place to another

4.    Experiential/Cultural- abstract measures such as visibility between
sites, social distance, and spheres of influence.

Through Moses Grandy and Harriet Jacob’s dynamic reminiscences, the extant data
on enslaved runaways near the Great Dismal Swamp, and the physical properties
of space within the Great Dismal Swamp landscape the shadowy foundations of how
the Great Dismal Swamp functioned as a quasi-dystopian landscape for enslaved
people is recovered. Ultimately the swamp embodied the promise of freedom as a
site of possible refuge, but also the horrors of the slavery regime itself.

Disrupting the Archive: Intersectionality and the Integration of the Digital
Humanities in the Classroom

Hilary Green

In today’s classroom, gender and race scholars strive to provide students with
a breadth of scholarship that represent the social, cultural, and political
experiences that define both the American and global experiences. For
scholar-activists working at large southern PWIs, the politicized
tensions present in society today stemming from difficult racial pasts, and
potential efforts at truth and reconciliation, all compel us to reconsider what
sources will most impact students’ understanding of these difficult subjects.
To effectively educate students, instructors do well to expose them to diverse
historical documents, assignments, and approaches. Digital humanities offer new
opportunities and challenges as eloquently expressed by Tara McPhersons’ “Why
Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and
Computation.” This conference presentation will explore how to use
engaging assignments (spatial analysis projects using Carto and documentary
history projects) and digital archive collections to introduce students to a
variety of sources using intersectional approaches and inclusive pedagogies
that are used to critically engage students from diverse backgrounds.

Digital archive collections offer scholars a valuable service by providing an
online platform to publish digital archives. Managing content is no easy task
and scholars as well as institutions have to find resources and time to develop
their sites in a way that encourages curiosity, usability, and scholarly
utility.

Colored Conventions is an excellent archival addition to the digital
humanities. Colored Convention’s purpose deserves quoting in full:

“This project seeks to not only learn about the lives of these mostly male
delegates, the places where they met and the social networks that they created
but to also account for the crucial work done by Black women in the broader
social networks that made these conventions possible.”

ColoredConventions.org endeavors to transform teaching and learning about this
historic collective organizing effort—and about the many leaders and places
involved in it—bringing them to digital life for a new generation of
undergraduate and graduate students and researchers across disciplines, for
high school teachers, and for community members interested in the history of
church, educational and entrepreneurial engagement” (Colored Convention, 2015).

As evidenced by Colored Convention’s purpose their aims are to reach a broad
audience which refers to the public humanities focus of the project. The
site has teaching aids, curriculum guides, as well as the primary source
documents that have been recovered from relative obscurity. What Colored
Conventions does is recover an entire archive of action performed by antebellum
era African Americans taking initiative to move closer to freedom.

In the context of pedagogy, intersectionality asks students to think beyond
narrow binaries that overdetermine contemporary discourse on identity and power
(Risam, 2016). For particularly vulnerable populations who have historically
experienced economic disadvantages the disciplines under the humanities does
not at first glance offer a high upward mobility. How then can the humanities
compete and attract a diverse array of students as well as engage scholars
toward its humanistic offerings? In engaging digital archive collections
centering marginalized people’s histories it becomes necessary to
interrogate the archive, recover subaltern experience, and reimagine new
approaches to historical interpretation. In doing these things
fresh perspectives unfold as the humanities discipline as a whole is
invigorated with scholarly interest. Students and scholars alike find new
purpose in the humanities. These new questions coupled with the innovation
in toolmaking within the digital invite a wealth of promise through
intersectional approaches and inclusive pedagogies.

Casting our Lights Before: Immersion as Access in The Tessera ARG

Kathryn Kaczmarek-Frew

“They say that coming events cast their shadows before. May they not sometimes
cast their lights before?” -- Ada Lovelace

Computer science and the technology industry are often regarded as the bastion
of white men. However, there is a movement in popular culture to recover
and make visible the contributions of women and minorities, from the major
motion picture Hidden Figures to the AMC series Halt and Catch Fire. Still more
active methods can be used to connect today’s youth to the realities of the
past and the promise of the future. Alternate reality games provide a
unique opportunity to combine historical knowledge and skill-building in a way
that pervades into daily life. In my presentation, I will show how our
alternate reality game The Tessera invites teen players to develop a more
nuanced understanding of computer history while demonstrating that they already
possess the computational thinking skills to make a future in the industry
accessible to them.

Developed as a collaboration between the University of Maryland, Brigham Young
University, and the Computer History Museum under a grant from the National
Science Foundation, The Tessera ARG uses the genre of Victorian gothic realism
and the trope of haunting to think about the influence of the past on the
present. The narrative focuses on the ghost of Ada Lovelace recruiting teenage
players, particularly those from demographics underrepresented in STEM
disciplines, to join her secret society known as The Tessera in their
fight against an even more mysterious destructive force known as S. Racing
against time, players complete a series of collaborative puzzles
emphasizing computational thinking skills such as pattern recognition,
decomposition (breaking down a problem into smaller steps), algorithmic design,
and data representation. By emphasizing the STEAM values of innovation and
creativity as the key to progress, The Tessera helps players recognize
that they already do computational thinking and that they can have a future in
the technology industry.

Like many ARGs, The Tessera distributes its narrative across several media,
presenting different opportunities for immersion. The Tessera: Ghostly Tracks
is a real-life experience in the Computer History Museum, where classes will
divide into groups to use digital clues and physical artifacts in
the Revolution exhibit to solve computational thinking puzzles and discover
which famous figures from computer history are haunting the museum.
Players will experience a highly embodied sense of immersion as they move
around the exhibit and manipulate props to solve the puzzles, such as decoding
the message etched on the top of a chessboard or using a code to open the six
padlocks on an “enchanted” crate, releasing the ghosts from the museum. In
contrast, The Tessera: Light in the Shadows is an online game in which Ada
guides players through the ruins of a decaying Victorian pub into the Tessera
stronghold of Horsley Towers to create new innovations inspired by key
inventions from history (such as the telegraph, the metric system, and Wi-Fi)
to thwart S’s destruction. The online game requires imaginative recentering
to immerse the player within the storyworld, aided by the use of first person
perspective, tension-inducing time limits, and the invitation to write
themselves into the narrative through the public-facing wiki (Ryan 1992). While
the goal is for players’ personal investment in the Tessera’s struggle to
translate into learning, I’m interested in studying how the different avenues
of immersion in the two experiences influence players, not only in their
interest in the game content but also their self-perception of
their computational thinking skills. This research will allow future game
designers to think about how different kinds of simulations (physical, digital,
augmented, and virtual) can be used for historical reconstruction to help
players best access the realities of buried pasts.

Power to the People: Recovery and Shared Authority in Civil Right Movement
Digital Work

Nishani Frazier

African American Studies, public history, and oral history methodologies play
central roles in the recovery of fairly unknown aspects of civil
rights movement history. However, this merger also required a philosophical
embrace of community engagement, power sharing, and open access
during historical production. Though these ideals may fit within digital
humanities, historical practice among academics is at odds with this approach.
This talk discusses the conflictual relationship between the academic and
digital, the changing role of the scholar/expert, the importance of community
in historical production, and the balance needed between recovery and shared
authority.

Theorizing African American Public History

Through the Digital Humanities

Expanding public understanding about the history of the Congress on Racial
Equality community organization and economic development through access to
primary sources, teacher resources, and mapping is the resource cornerstone
within this project. It acts to recover a little known aspect about CORE and
its relationship to racial uplift and economic development while providing
access for future scholars and other interested persons. This process is a
model for intersecting African American scholarship and digital humanities.

The digital representation Harambee City illustrates this philosophy through:

1. Broad accessibility

2.    Providing a second layer of learning through open access to primary
sources and teacher lesson plans

3.    Knowledge sharing - commentary/exchange on the website

4.    Community organization training

The aim of this project is to promulgate further inquiry within historical
study of the Civil Rights Movement as well as contemporary
interventions concerning social justice issues (Frazier 2016). Following on
Jessica Marie Johnson’s call to action regarding the urgent need for the
digital humanities to engage with society’s “marginalized or
discriminated against” this project endeavors to fulfill historical as well as
justice imperatives needed within the digital humanities by examining civil
rights movement history not commonly centered (Dinsman 2016).

Notes

1. The Old Ashburn School, an historic African American schoolhouse in Loudoun
County, Virginia was vandalized with swastikas on October 1, 2016, another
incident occurred in Tallahatchie County, Mississippi where the memorial sign
of murdered African American teenager Emmett Till was found riddled
with bullets on October 15, 2016. As far as the Pacific Northwest in Portland,
Oregon in September of 2016 the statue of Vera Katz, a progressive politician
and former mayor of the city was sprayed hateful epithets. Katz is of Jewish
Menshevik origin and her family fled Nazi controlled Germany in 1933.

