Digital Humanities at Berkeley and the Digital Life Project

Courtney von Vacano

cvacano@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley, United States of America

Abigail T. De Kosnik

adekosnik@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley, United States of America

Stephen Best

sbest@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley, United States of America

“The Digital Life Project” at UC Berkeley aims to reframe how we define digital
humanities by bringing critical analysis to every stage of a highly
collaborative and distributed research process. Below, we provide three
examples of how this work is evolving at UC Berkeley.

To begin, incidents in the #BlackLivesMatter social movement raised our
collective awareness and compelled us to rethink the digital
humanities landscape on campus. We realized that understandings of race were
being shaped by the dissemination of footage, images, and words. In particular,
the dissemination of images of racial violence through media has begun to
change the nature of questions in scholarship on race. Questions can no longer
overlook a focus on the structure of those sources of data. Furthermore, in
this rapid shift, social media must be understood as an infrastructure of
hybrid online + offline human existence (i.e., the digital life).

We might perceive the dystopia of digital life in the preponderance of
disturbing images of brutality and oppression, an archive that many—including
victims of that violence—wish to reclaim. Conversely, we might understand the
utopia of digital life to entail the affordance for social media users to
document and share their experiences, instantaneously share information, and
recruit attention, assistance, and aid to individuals and groups in need. In
focusing on the broad rubric of “digital life,” moreover, we want to support
both dialogue in the broader university community and plans for focused
research on a range of issues.

The first example of research within The Digital Life Project is a
collaborative endeavor that is embedded in a digital humanities, ethnic studies
methods course. Professor Keith Feldman worked closely with both the Ethnic
Studies Library and the D-Lab to implement this project that included 65
undergraduate students, two graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow,
in addition to library staff. Students worked with digitized field recordings
of events at Berkeley from the late 1960s from the Yuen Archive. The
structuring and coding of the audio data went back to (a) all of the students
for their individual research papers; (b) the Ethnic Studies Library to help
seed a Thesaurus for the Yuen archive; and (c) the public in the form of
more user-friendly audio files housed on the Internet Archive. The project
impacted multiple constituencies in both immediate and long-term ways. By the
end of this course, students were able to historicize the emergence and
transformation of the humanities as a field of knowledge, use computational
methodologies to conduct research on race and ethnicity, practice various ways
to read closely, critically, and against the grain, while at the same time
being exposed to the affordances and challenges of digital humanities.

Next, we embarked on a groundbreaking initiative to track and monitor types of
Internet-based hate: The Online Hate Index (OHI). The goal is to create
a comparative analysis of the online locations, sources, and relationships, and
motivations behind online hate targeting different populations. Because of
the marked rise of xenophobia in America today, the first installment focused
on anti-Latino immigrant sentiments; subsequent studies will examine
different forms of targeted hate. The D-Lab provided guidance on designing and
implementing a computational research methodology that employed
Machine Learning. The League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) provided
specific information relating to anti-immigrant, anti-refugee, and antimigrant
populations and enabled the project findings to become actionable. In the
future, ADL's Center for Extremism and Center for Technology and Society
will provide expertise on the online locations and characteristics of hate
groups, in-house computing resources, and the techniques used to
terrorize groups.

After one year of the Digital Life Project, we reflect upon the lessons learned
in generating a new body of research through a highly distributed
infrastructure

that optimizes (a) the knowledge of graduate students and staff consultants and
(b) mentorship within working groups and research teams comprised
of undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, faculty, and staff. At the same
time, we are keeping our sights on mobilizing activism in order to foment
an activist/researcher stance. Our collaboratory research work clearly defines
roles and tasks within the research teams and thereby provides much
needed apprenticeship opportunities that underrepresented minorities lack.

