Beyond Coocurrence:

Network Visualization in the Civil War Governors of Kentucky
Digital Documentary Edition

Patrick A. Lewis

patrick.lewis@ky.gov

Kentucky Historical Society, United States of America

Jeff Dycus

jeff.dycus@ky.gov

Kentucky Historical Society, United States of America

Anthony P. Curtis

tony.curtis@ky.gov

Kentucky Historical Society, United States of America

Whitney R. Smith

whitney.smith@ky.gov

Kentucky Historical Society, United States of America

Sara Carlsbad Brumfield

saracarl@gmail.com

Brumfield Labs, United States of America

Ben W. Brumfield

benwbrum@gmail.com

Brumfield Labs, United States of America

The Civil War Governors of Kentucky Digital Documentary Edition (CWG-K) is a
freely-accessible online collection of historical documents associated with
the chief executives of the state, 1860-1865. Yet CWG-K is about far more than
the five governors. Uniquely positioned to view, reflect upon, and intervene in
the lives of thousands of people experiencing the traumas of civil war,
Kentucky's chief executives stood at the intersection of public and private
life during an era that transformed the nation. Collectively, their papers
provide a multi-faceted lens through which we can recover and understand more
fully the lives of countless men, women, and children who have been
heretofore both historically undocumented and archivally silenced.

After five years of active editorial work, CWG-K

published the facsimiles and transcriptions of 10,000

documents online in 2016. Driven primarily by keyword searches and limited
metadata faceting, Early Access is a digital evolution of the printed
letterpress edition and its index. The content is interpretatively rich and
suggestive and can be queried and sorted in a number of ways, but the
experience is still ultimately linear. The ultimate goal of CWG-K, however, is
to create a digital research environment within which a user can encounter the
past multi-dimensionally through the documents and the powerful annotation
network that links the documents together through the individuals,
institutions, and places found in the texts.

CWG-K's true impact on scholarship, however, is through annotation. To the
extent possible given the restrictions and biases of the historical record,
CWG-K is identifying, researching, and linking together every person, place,
and organization found in its documents. This web consisting of hundreds of
thousands of networked nodes will dramatically expand the number of historical
actors, show scholars new patterns and hidden relationships, and recognize the
humanity and agency of historically marginalized people. The network of
identified and annotated people, places, businesses, government agencies, and
military units, will come as close as possible to a historical reconstruction
of mid-nineteenth century society as it was lived and experienced in wartime
Kentucky.

In this document-driven historical ecosystem, users can explore
intuitively—moving seamlessly through seemingly disparate historical
themes, events, and topics; breaking into the plane of social and geographic
space to understand the deep patterns that underlay the issues raised in a text
or set of texts; and moving forward and backwards through time to put this
reconstructed historical world in motion and understand patterns of ebb and
flow.

Phase II of the project (September 2016-September 2017) extends the edition
into network visualization. Instead of reinventing the wheel for all the
different functionality that an editorial annotation tool needs to have, we
have taken the best existing open-source tools and integrated them to achieve
our goals. TEI-XML files are exported from the transcription and control file
tool DocTracker, published on the Omeka-powered Early Access website, and
checked into a Github repository. Research assistants use Hy-pothes.is to
identify entities within each document on the Early Access site. The
custom-built MashBill tool queries Hypothes.is for those annotations, allowing
research assistants to identify references to entities and

build relationships between initially coocurring entities and document
biographical research from external sources. MashBill then uses the annotations
and identifications to update the TEI documents automatically with the
appropriate persName/or-gName/placeName references and re-publishing them to
Github.

In the open source tool MashBill, CWG-K makes an important contribution to
network analysis in digital humanities. With a few exceptions network analysis
is still dominated by network construction based on cooccurence of entities
within documents. These entities are most frequently created by automated
named entity recognition performed on plaintext. CWG-K researcher's close
reading of documents to extract entities allows for much accurate
identification of entities. The use of Hypothes.is makes such
human-powered entity recognition far more scalable than traditional manual
tagging of TEI-XML. Rather than using pure cooccurence MashBill allows
relationships to be defined by researchers consulting resources outside
the documents of the edition. These relationships are then visualized with a
D3.js visualization which is deeply linked to both the documents themselves as
well as the articles written during the course of entity and relationship
research on the people, places, and things. The open source MashBill tool may
be reused for any TEI/Omeka project to reduce the effort and improve quality of
entity identification.

Since the Civil War Governors of Kentucky Digital Documentary Edition is a
project of the Kentucky Historical Society, it has always focused on public
access. The development of MashBill and integration of the network
visualization produced with that tool into the early access website will enable
the public to discover the lives and stories of everyday people who interacted
with the offices of the governors. Our synthesis of approaches and technologies
provides an example other projects can benefit from, showing how to leverage
open source tools and standards to efficiently identify and build network
visualization in public digital editions.

