Beyond the Historic Facade: Skyscrapers, Scapegoats, and the Digital
Reclamation of Toronto's Queer

Streetscapes

Constance Crompton

constance.crompton@ubc.ca

University of British Columbia, Canada

Michelle Schwartz

michelle.schwartz@ryerson.ca

Ryerson University, Canada

Gentrification takes many forms, ranging from whole scale bulldozing and forced
relocations, to skyrocketing rents and dominion of multinational corporations
over entire neighbourhoods. In Toronto, gentrification is facadist: the
hollowed brick skins of Victorian storefronts are preserved in orderly
rows, with great glass office buildings or condos sprouting up through their
once-solid roofs and porticos. Luxury boutiques and art galleries take over the
spaces once held by convenience stores and leave the original, rusting signage
above the door, urging pedestrians to drink Coke. A local diner closes one
night and reopens the next as a cocktail lounge - the interior and
exterior remain untouched. The same 1960s banquets that once served $5 burgers
to an impoverished and marginalized local population now serve burgers
that cost $17, even though the name advertised on the now-vintage neon sign
outside remains the same.

Most city dwellers are familiar with these external signs of gentrification.
Gentrification, however, does not just shape the streetscape, it shapes the
outlook of city dwellers in a way that obliterates urban history, especially
the history of marginalized communities, even though it is these diverse
populations of people of colour, immigrants, queers, and the working poor that
gave cities the dynamic qualities that made them initially so attractive to new
residents. In Toronto, the building boom of the last decade has left only
the facade of much of the city’s diverse history. What is behind the facade -
luxury condos and chain stores -represents a completely different model for a
city, one that prioritizes neoliberalism, conservative values, and the
homogenization of thought.

In the traditional narrative of gentrification, gentrification begins with the
influx of white gay and artistic communities, the so-called “creative
class,” into economically disadvantaged areas. These “shock troops” of
gentrification clear the way for yuppies with their preference for boutique
coffee shops and organic vegetables. Rents rise and the original low-income
or minority population of the neighbourhood is displaced, pushed further and
further to the margins as the initial hot spot of gentrification rapidly
expands. According to Sarah Schulman, Distinguished Professor of the Humanities
at the College of Staten Island, this traditional narrative does not get to the
heart of gentrification. The gay community has become a convenient straw man
for an outcome that is shaped by much more powerful forces in
municipal government, and the changing tenor of city life is due not to the
introduction of artists spaces, but to the “gentrification of the mind” or the
suburbanization of our understanding of city space.

In her book, The Gentrification of the Mind, Schulman quotes the artist Penny
Arcade’s piece “New York Values”: “There is a gentrification that happens
to buildings and neighborhoods and there is a gentrification that happens to
ideas.” Gentrification, according to Schulman’s theory, is caused not simply by
the influx of new people, but when those people come to cities “not to join in
or to learn and evolve, but to homogenize,” bringing “the values of the
gated community and a willingness to trade freedom for security” (30).
Gentrification “replaces most people’s experiences with the perceptions of the
privileged and calls that reality” and as a result “gentrified happiness is
often available to us in return for collusion with injustice” (161, 166).

In the remaking of Toronto as a city of facades, are we not only erasing our
history, but permanently altering the idea of what our city is, who it is for,
and what purpose it serves?

And is there a way the digital humanities scholars in particular can fight
these forces to a halt? Drawing on Schulman’s argument and using the Lesbian
and Gay Liberation in Canada project’s spatial model of the Toronto gay scene
as a case study, the short paper proposed here will argue that the freely
accessible publication of digital models of historical communities can be used
to push back against the gentrification of the mind. The presentation that will
accompany the paper will mark the launch of the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in
Canada map, built from the 17,000+ person, place, and event entity records in
the LGLC database.

The Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada project reconfigures Donald McLeod’s
remarkable two-volume work, Lesbian and Gay Liberation In Canada: A Selected
Annotated Chronology, 1964-1981 as a TEI-encoded resource and graph database.
The prototype database, available at http://lglc.ca consists of
event, publication, person, and place records spanning from the founding of the
first homophile associations in Canada through to the start of the AIDS crisis.
The LGLC project extends McLeod’s codex form in order to data mine and
represent queer history spatially and temporally. The project not only makes a
much-neglected part of Canadian history available for mainstream scholarly use,
it also provides a foundation for modeling identity and representing time and
space in TEI.

There is much to model spatially and temporally. In the 1960s, the Toronto’s
gay scene was located on Yonge Street and by the 1970s the bars had
migrated north along Yonge from Queen Street towards Wellesley Street. Two of
the most famous bars on this strip were the Parkside at 530 Yonge Street and
the St. Charles Tavern at 488 Yonge Street, both owned by Norman Bolter. The
neighbourhood surrounding the former sites of the Parkside and the St. Charles
is currently a site of massive development. Gone are the seedy bars and massage
parlours. Large glass condos are rising from bulldozed lots and from the tops
of heritage buildings.

The building that housed the St. Charles Tavern still stands above Yonge Street
at Wellesley. It is slated to become a condo in 2017, the iconic clock tower
that served for decades as a meeting spot for the gay community will be
preserved at the base of a proposed 153 metre glass spire. The incorporation of
this piece of gay history into a shining skyscraper only furthers serves the
ideology that scapegoats the gay community as the root cause of gentrification,
making the million dollar condos imagined by a developer seem like an
inevitability, rather than just one potential future amongst many. What is lost
in this new instance of facadism is the history of the St. Charles Tavern, a
violent history neither the city nor developers seem keen to acknowledge
or commemorate.

For example, tracing the events outside the St. Charles Tavern on Halloween
from 1968 to 1981 reveals Toronto's violently homophobic history, and the
inadequate policy and police response to that violence. In the 1960s it was
illegal for men to wear clothing of the opposite sex in Toronto, a rule that
was relaxed at Halloween. Every Halloween St. Charles Tavern hosted a drag
show, and every year a homophobic mob congregated outside the bar to throw eggs
and rotten vegetables as the queens arrived. In 1968, police found gasoline
bombs behind the tavern, and yet in the following years police still permitted
crowds to hurl insults shout slogans such as "kill the queers", and throw
debris at the patrons. It took a decade for the police to start arresting
people in the mob; in the meantime a volunteer gay defense patrol, Operation
Jack O'Lantern, escorted patrons through the neighbourhood and in through the
back door of the tavern. Between 1975 and 1978, 14 patrons of Toronto's gay bar
scene were murdered. Eight of those murders went unsolved amid accusations of
police homophobia, which were only exacerbated by homophobic articles published
in the Toronto Police Association Journal. Publishing this history online, not
only in text, but in map form, will make it accessible to an audience that will
include not just scholars, but the citizens of Toronto. By developing
accompanying pedagogical tools to guide users through the map, we hope to
engage local residents, as well as the thousands of students at nearby
universities and schools, in working to reclaim that lost history, and undoing
some of the effects of the gentrification of the mind.

