Trauma Representations in Videogames

Jennifer Olive

jolive1@gsu.edu

Georgia State University, United States of America

Over the last few years, the videogame community has seen an increase in the
visibility of indie games, particularly ones that focus on serious subjects.
Given the name “empathy games” by Minority Media’s Vander Caballero in his 2014
GDC talk, this sub-genre is known for its intense and meaningful narratives
that often bring to light traumatic experiences. While the classification of
these games under empathy can be problematic as highlighted by Anna Anthropy
(2015) and the responses to her game Dys4ia, the phenomenological experience of
playing these videogames offers a new perspective through which one can engage
understandings of new media aesthetics and narrative design. Moreover,
Caballero’s (2014) identification of the “empathy game” category as strategic
for project support highlights the development of the sub-genre at a point
which methodologies of analyzing these aesthetics and design choices as they
relate to the representation of trauma within videogames are needed most.
Building on the relevance of the issue as well as the unexplored intersections
that such mediation brings to prior understandings of critical theory, this
paper will propose a methodology for analyzing representations of trauma in
videogames that builds on current work in the field. Moreover, it will explore
the theoretical implications of such a method to the model of player experience
through remediation in order to offer a broader understanding of the meaningful
intersection of trauma narratives and new media.

Beginning with its most well-known applications in the 1990s with the work of
Cathy Caruth (1995, 1996) in literary studies and in the 2000s with the work
of Dominick LaCapra (2014) in history, the study of trauma has spread from its
Freudian psychoanalytic roots to become a field of study in both the
sciences and the humanities. Both of the models developed by and around these
two theorists are extremely helpful for literary representations given their
foundations in disciplines that largely rely on print media and are able to be
applied to different genres given their multidisciplinary foci; however, the
study of trauma representations has not yet spread widely to new media
applications aside from its application in testimonial media. This exclusion
suggests a gap in scholarship for trauma studies as it does not account for how
these models of trauma may be useful in or influenced by other media.

With the increasing cultural and economic impact of videogames, it is essential
that the digital humanities develop a critical framework for understanding and
analyzing the intersections of trauma studies and videogames. Tobi
Smethurst’s work (2014, 2015a, 2015b) attempts to bridge this gap by
identifying how both game studies and trauma studies could benefit from an
interdisciplinary application. Smethurst’s doctoral thesis (2015a), explores
this intersection to offer a tripartite methodology for analyzing trauma in
videogames: interreactivity, empathy, and complicity. This methodology is
particularly useful because it examines the rhetorical feedback loop between
player and game, which, she argues, creates a very specific experience for
representing trauma by implicating the player as a perpetrator, and it works
very well for games that are designed to elicit such feedback from players.
This methodology, however, does not fully account for videogames being able to
represent trauma in ways that do not end in making the player complicit in the
trauma.

Expanding on this foundation, my paper will discuss the use of videogames as an
interactive digital media platform for representing traumatic
narratives, identify a methodology for analyzing such representations, and
argue for a model that understands play in videogames
containing representations of trauma as a form of witnessing. This work will
begin by grounding its understanding of trauma as it is defined in literary
studies through the works of Caruth (1995, 1996) and LaCapra (2014)
 respectively and expanding its theoretical framework to the use of digital
media through digital narrative and media studies by exploring the affordances
of videogames highlighted by Janet Murray (1997) in Hamlet on the Holodeck.
Next, I will discuss a methodology for analyzing representations of trauma in
videogames that utilizes those media aesthetics and the object’s use of
procedural rhetoric as defined by Ian Bogost (2007) in Persuasive Games to
create a remediated (Bolter and Grusin, 2000) experience of witnessing as
described by Dori Laub (1995) in “Truth as Testimony: The Process and the
Struggle.” In doing so, I will discuss how this methodology provides a much
needed perspective concerning the intersection of videogames and trauma
studies. Additionally, I will argue for a model of representing trauma
in videogames that seeks to understand feedback loops with the audience in
broader terms, which I will ground in the understanding of videogame ethics
as discussed in The Ethics of Computer Games (2009) by Miguel Sicart. Such a
model will focus on the mediation of the trauma through the videogame
experience and account for the overlapping of ethical systems that exist for
the player outside of the gameworld, which, I will argue, helps the player
navigate the different levels of witnessing. Together, this combination
of theoretical foundations will expand on the current scholarship to offer a
more holistic understanding of the potential held by videogames as a medium
to represent trauma.

