Frequently Cited Passages Across Time: New Methods for Studying the
Critical Reception of Texts

Jonathan Reeve

jonathan.reeve@columbia.edu

Columbia University, United States of America

Milan Terlunen

m.terlunen@columbia.edu

Columbia University, United States of America

Sierra Eckert

sierra.eckert@columbia.edu

Columbia University, United States of America

Text reuse detection technology and approximate text matching have made
possible the large-scale computational identi cation of intertextuality.
These technologies have often been used in plagiarism detection and in studies
of journalistic text reuse. Fewer studies, however, have applied these
methods to humanities research. We present a method for quantifying the
critical reception history of a source text by analyzing the precise location,
density and chronology of its citations.

Our work builds on a recent set of digital humanities projects that use text
reuse detection in order to study the afterlife of texts through
textual quotation. The Viral Texts project and Digital Breadcrumbs of Brothers
Grimm take algorithmic approaches to studying text reuse and circulation
in their respective fields of research: nineteenth-century popular press and
folklore. In both projects, the focus is on using text reuse detection to
uncover hidden networks of reuse—the reprinting of short news items and the
reuse of motifs or minimal narrative units in folklore—in corpora without
standardized conventions of citation. Our project seeks to take this work a
step further, by applying a similar method in a di erent area of cultural
production where more standardized citation con- ventions already
exist: academic citations. We draw on the work of Dennis Tenen—in using
extracted citations to critically visualize the “knowledge domain” of
Comparative Literature—and a recent project by JSTOR Labs that uses the text of
Shakespeare’s plays and the U.S. Constitution to visualize the scholarship
surrounding passages in those sets of texts (Tenen, forthcoming in 2017). Like
these projects, we hope to leverage the explicit and institutionalized nature
of academic citation in studying text-reuse patterns, using text reuse to ask
questions of critical attention in canon formation. By focusing initially on a
single text in order to ask about its critical reception history, we hope
to provide new methods for studying not only text-reuse patterns, but the
sociology of citation practices— studying changes in when, how, and what
critics cite from a given text.

In applying these methods to literary scholarship, we’ve chosen to start on a
relatively small scale. George Eliot’s novel Middlemarch is an ideal test
case, due to its length, copyright status, stable editorial history and
canonicity. Perhaps most appropriately for this study, Middlemarch is known for
its narrator’s wise generalizations—highly quotable fragments that have been
featured in more than one Victorian volume of George Eliot’s sayings. For the
full project we are working with JSTOR Labs to assemble a corpus of all 6,500
articles on Middlemarch in their collection. The gures below display
preliminary results with a smaller 483-sample corpus.

[264-1]

Figure 1. Citation Frequency Heat Map for Middlemarch, by Decade

At the largest scale, Figure 1 shows the frequency of citations across the
whole of Middlemarch as a heat map segmented by decade, with yellow signifying
the highest citation and black, no citations. Here, the novel is broken into 50
segments along the horizontal axis, and each segment is colored according to
the number of times any part of its text has appeared in the
critical literature. A number of overall trends are noticeable here. The very
beginning and the end of the novel show the most numbers of quotations,
followed by the rst quarter of the novel. Overall, the second half of
the novel, except for the ending, is signi cantly less quoted from than the
first half.

Viewed chronologically, we see that critical interest in certain sections—as
expressed in numbers of quotations—appears to shift over time. In the
1950s, most of the critical citation was of the end of the novel, at its
climactic third-to-last section, but this interest has faded almost completely
by the present day. At the same time, critical interest in the beginning of
the novel seemed to be at a relative low point in the 1950s, but quickly became
a highly quoted segment by the 1970s. This shift may represent a change in
critical attention to the parts of the novel, shifting from the end of the
novel at midcentury to the beginning of the novel, where it still appears to
rest.

indue me buuuiLuueb ui leimiiiiie icbinuri dppedi dii uucupduuri iui Bedlam.
She could not reconcile the anxieties of a spiritual life involving eternal
consequences, with a keen interest in gimp and artificial protrusions of
drapery. Her mind was theoretic, and yearned by its nature after some lofty
conception of the world which might frankly include the parish of Tipton and
her own rule of conduct there; she was enamoured of intensity and greatness,
and rash in embracing whatever seemed to her to have those aspects; likely to
seek martyrdom, to make retractations, and then to incur martyrdom after all in
a quarter where she had not sought it. Certainly such elements in the

rhararfor r\f a marrlanoahla nlrl fonHoH ti-i irttorforo w/lth hor IartH

Figure 2. Citation Frequency Text Browser for Middlemarch

Figure 2 shows a finer grained analysis, no longer segmented by decade,
displaying an excerpt from our paragraph-level text browser for Middlemarch.
Here again, the color coding represents the number of quotations of each
segment, ranging from unquoted black passages, to infrequently quoted purple
and red passages and more frequently quoted yellow ones. In our sample, the
somewhat abstract contrast between “spiritual life” versus “gimp” and “drapery”
remains unquoted, whereas the short, punchy “Her mind was theoretic” has
triggered numerous quotations, peaking with the stirring phrase “some
lofty conception of the world”, before the frequency falls again slightly as
the narrator describes how this character’s idealism clashes with the real
world. This annotated edition could provide both scholars and students of
literature with a way to read the novel for passages that have been most
discussed in secondary literature, and for passages that have been
critically neglected.

The potential applications of this methodology are numerous and wide-ranging.
Firstly, this methodology can be used in any discipline to investigate the
discipline’s theoretical history. As with the 1980 study of Wundt’s influence
on the field of psychology (Brozek, 1980), our methodology could rapidly and
easily produce similar investigations for the influence of Saussure in
linguistics, Bourdieu in sociology, Mead in anthropology, Beauvoir in feminist
theory, and so on. Moreover, this analysis would be much more finegrained,
registering not only the frequency of works cited but also specifc sections,
passages and even key phrases within them.

In addition, we see particular relevance of our methodology to disciplines
substantially engaged in questions of quotation and commentary. In
theology, com- mentaries on sacred texts could be analysed in this way to give
insights into the texts’ interpretive history. In philosophy, the citation of
key texts in later peri- ods could be used to assess the shifting priorities of
subsequent generations of philosophers. Legal scholars, given the exceptional
value placed on precedent in law, have long been interested in using digital
technologies and studying citation practices (both of which underpin the recent
Ravel project at Stanford University’s Law School), which our methodology would
make even more granular (not just page numbers but exact phrases).

To return to literary studies, while our own initial project is focusing on
academic literary criticism of the post-war period, the methodology could
equally be applied to earlier aspects of literary reception. We are interested
to examine whether patterns of citation change measurably since English
literature is established as a discipline in the late nineteenth century. Going
even further back, our methodology could equally be applied to quotations of
literary works in non-academic formats, whether non-fiction (newspapers,
journals, essays) or other literary works (citations of Shakespeare in Romantic
poetry, say).

Our own next steps in this project will be to expand our corpus of quoted
texts—the single texts whose citations we are tracing. Do similar patterns of
citation apply to Eliot’s other novels? Do they apply to novels by Dickens, or
by Austen? These analyses will allow us to begin to formulate general
hypotheses about patterns of quotation within literary scholarship of recent
decades, while also offering unprecedented insights into the works of each of
these authors.

