Mapping 20th Century America

Lauren Tilton

ltilton@richmond.edu

University of Richmond, United States of America

Taylor Arnold

tarnold2@richmond.edu

University of Richmond, United States of America

Jason Heppler

jason.heppler@gmail.com

University of Nebraska - Omaha

United States of America

Robert Nelson

rnelson2@richmond.edu

University of Richmond, United States of America

Over the last several years, spatial humanities have grown in prominence.
Initiatives such as the University of Virginia’s Institute for
Enabling Geospatial Scholarship and Stanford’s Spatial History Project have
signaled and begun exploring the impact of the spatial turn. Writing for UVA’s
institute, historian Jo Guildi states, “The spatial turn represents the impulse
to position these new tools [i.e. GIS] against old questions” (Guildi, 2010).
In this panel, we challenge the idea that the spatial turn simply asks
old questions and rather argue that it helps pose new as well as answer old
questions in twentieth-century American history. In particular, we employ the
idea of deep mapping as theorized by historian David Bodenhemer to discuss new
scholarship and directions in digital spatial analysis. We also explore the
role public humanities plays in framing these projects. The 45-minute panel
entitled “Mapping the 20 th Century United States” will focus on the role
of the spatial analysis in the digital, public humanities and its impact on
historical scholarship.

Robert Nelson will begin the panel with “Reckoning with Redlining: Public
Engagement with ‘Mapping Inequality.’” The Mapping Inequality project
provides unparalleled access to the infamous redlining maps and area
descriptions created by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation during the Great
Depression.

Accessed by tens of thousands of visitors in the first two weeks following its
release, this paper will draw upon hundreds of contributions to a
public conversation about redlining and urban inequality around “Mapping
Inequality” in social media and the comment threads of press the project has
received. Nelson will analyze the design decisions he and his colleagues made
to prompt public engagement with these maps and the history of redlining. He
will also critically use the reaction to the project to critically assess how
successful this public-facing digital humanities project has been in prompting
productive conversations about redlining and urban and racial inequalities.

Continuing with our exploration of the 1930s, we will turn to Taylor Arnold and
Lauren Tilton who will discuss combining archives spatially in order to produce
new knowledge about and public access to documentary expression in the era.
They will focus on layering the Federal Writer’s Project, which documented
through text the life histories of thousands of Americans, with 170,000
photographs from the Farm Security Administration-Office of War Information.
Placing these archives for the first time in conversation, their deep maps
incite new questions about the role of the federal government in documenting
the lived experiences of Americans during the Great Depression and the types
of representation produced.

Next we will turn to the work of Jason Heppler on post-war America. Silicon
Valley represented one of the twentieth century’s greatest modernizations
of urban space. Beginning in the 1950s, the formation of a new high tech
suburbanism led the Valley to become identified not only with a center of
hopeful possibility as the Industrial Age industries of the Midwest
and Northeast began to decline, but also gave expression to an environmental
politic that attempted to reconcile an environmentally conscious pursuit of the
American Dream. Yet the claim for high tech’s “clean” industrialization fell
short as environmental concerns -- ranging from controlling growth to
widespread chemical contamination of water supplies -- reshaped discussions
about public and private space. Deep maps help explore the transformation of
urban space over time.

Along with addressing the role of spatial analysis in cutting edge humanities
scholarship, each paper will outline which technologies they are using along
with their possibilities and challenges. In particular, Robert Nelson will
address a cutting edge spatial toolkit the University of Richmond Digital
Scholarship Lab and

Statmen Design are developing for use across the digital humanities. The
panelists will also discuss the role of collaboration, the process of
developing crossinstitutional partnerships and designing for public audiences.

Reckoning with Redlining: Public

Engagement with "Mapping Inequality"

Robert Nelson

In keeping with the conference theme of access and its emphasis upon
public-facing scholarship, this presentation will reflect upon hundreds of
comments and several conversations from the lay public about "Mapping
Inequality". A collaboration of teams at four universities, "Mapping
Inequality" currently includes nearly all of the more than 150 "security maps"
and nearly 10,000 "area descriptions" created by the Home Owners' Loan
Corporation during the Great Depression. These maps assessed mortgage risk
for thousands of neighborhoods in U.S. cities large and small on a scale of "A"
to "D". "A" neighborhoods were deemed "best," presenting minimal risks for
banks and lenders; "D" neighborhoods were deemed "hazardous" for mortgage
financing.

MAPPING INEQUALITY Redlining in New Deal America

- Introduction Bibliographic Note & Bibliography About Contact Us -

[267-1]

These grades were explicitly racialist and racist. HOLC's survey instruments
asked local agents to quantify the "infiltration of" undesirable populations of
African Americans and immigrants. To cite just a few examples, a small
subsection of a Tacoma neighborhood was graded "D" though otherwise identical
to the surrounding "B" neighborhood because "Three highly respected Negro
families own homes and live in the middle block of this area facing Verde
Street. While very much above the average of their race, it is quite generally
recognized by Realtors that their presence seriously detracts from
the desirability of their immediate neighborhood." Proximity to black
neighborhoods was enough to impact HOLC's risk assessment. A subsection of
a neighborhood in Richmond was graded "C" rather than "B" because "Respectable
people but homes are too near negro area D2." In contrast, a
Camden neighborhood kept an"A" grade despite bordering an African American
neighborhood, but only because "High walls separates this section from the
colored area to the south" that effectively prevented their "spread."

[267-2]

These grades had real consequences. Through this HOLC program, the federal
government reinforced redlining as a best practice within the real
estate industry, in effect cutting off hundreds of thousands of African
Americans off from equitable access to mortgage financing and thus
homeownership, which arguably was the most significant mechanism of familial
wealth accumulation in twentieth-century America. While of course it is by no
means the only or even primary cause, this redlining program helped
to contribute to generational wealth disparities between white and black
Americans, where today the median wealth of white households is a shocking 13
times that of black households.

We designed "Mapping Inequality" not only with researchers but activists and
the general public in mind. More than 150 of the HOLC maps have
been georectified (nearly all of them, though we still have a few to add and
undoubtedly a few more will surface), and polygons for each neighborhood added.
The site is location aware and asks new users if they want to view their, or
alternately the nearest, city. The opacity of the raster maps can be adjusted
to help viewers connect the grades to the contemporary cityscape.

Nearly all of the neighborhoods polygons can be clicked to read the area
description survey. In short, we designed it hoping to encourage viewers to
grapple with the materials related to their own localities and to prompt them
to make connection to the present.

MAPPING INEQUALITY Redlining in New Deal America

Search by city or state

- Introduction Bibliographic Note & Bibliography About Contact Us -

[267-3]

The introduction and other contextual materials on the site convey the authors'
collective assessment that "New Deal era housing policies ... helped set the
course for contemporary America." We also include a visualization inspired by
Ernest Burgess's concentric circle theory to suggest that HOLC policies
definition of the interior of cities as "slums" functioned as a selffulfilling
prophecy. Nevertheless, the site prioritizes access, exploration, and reuse of
these important primary source materials. We do not provide these materials
completely without commentary, but through our design choices we do facilitate
and encourage relatively direct engagement with HOLC's maps and surveys.

All of these materials were available in the National Archives. While materials
for many cities had been digitized, to date there has been no
comprehensive collection let along one offering the functionality of "Mapping
Inequality." We have no doubt that these materials will be useful to
researchers--not just historians but economists, urban planners,
artists, medical doctors, etc.--and will facilitate a far more nuance
understanding of HOLC and its consequences. We also have abundant evidence that
these materials are a boon for activists working on fair housing and other
social justice causes as well.

While we're excited about this, we intentionally developed the site as a public
history project that aimed to spark conversations about wealth and
racial inequality in American cities past and present. By that measure, the
project so far has been a success. Two and a half weeks after being released,
the map has received about 44,000 visits and been the subject of online
coverage from NPR, National Geographic, Slate, CityLab, FastCo., Forbes, and
Curbed, all of which have narrated the state's role in fostering redlining
and wealth inequality.

In the comment section of these stories, in stories in local news sources, and
in social media there has been a broad-ranging conversation about wealth
and racial inequalities. On one of the spectrum, some respondents have been
dismissive of the project, suggesting that this happened 80 years ago and is
a remnant of the past that has little relevance today; one person notably
characterizing the site as nothing more than "historical racism porn." Others
have responded to such comments that this is important inasmuch as many of
these 80-year old maps resemble the racial and class landscapes of America
today and that the government's role in reinforcing redlining and
racial disparities of wealth isn't widely understood.

Beyond these arguments about the impact of HOLC and relevance of redlining for
understanding inequality in twenty-first-century cities, some of the most
interesting and revealing comments have come from people for whom the maps have
prompted reflection upon their own family histories. "I grew up in Detroit in
the late 50's and 60's," one man wrote. "My address was 20400 Monte Vista, the
corner Monte vista and Norfolk. Two streets east, starting at the corner of
Birwood and 8 mile, was a wall. The wall was 12-15 feet high, made of grey
concrete blocks and ran behind the homes towards 7 mile, extending to
an abandoned army base at the corner of Pembrook and Birwood. The wall was
built to divide the neighborhoods, one side was all African Americans, The
other all Caucasian. My mother lived on one side of the wall, it was all
African American. She once (just once) told me that one could hear the White
families on the other side of the wall talking, see them occasionally if a ball
came over the fence and they asked for it, most times they did not. One had
no contact, ever. The wall is still there, physically and emotionally." While
so far this story is rather exceptional in its detail, it has prompted us to
think about the possibility of using the site to solicit and collect stories
about the consequences of redlining and segregation on particular individuals,
families, and communities.

Given that "Mapping Inequality" has been at the center of several online
conversations and hundreds of comments on websites two and a half weeks after
it was first released, I'm optimistic that it will continue to occasion more
conversations about the role of racism, redlining, and the state in
inequalities of wealth in American cities. This presentation will provide an
opportunity to critically reflect upon these materials and gauge the success
and failures of this particular digital humanities project and perhaps
the digital humanities more generally in informing socially and politically
important public conversations. This presentation will also reflect upon the
pros and cons of interpretive framing in digital humanities projects aimed at
the public.

Mapping the Federal Writers Project

Lauren Tilton and Taylor Arnold

“Mapping the Federal Writers Project” will explore the role and implementation
of deep mapping and spatial analysis in interpreting and
understanding documentary expression in 1930s America. As Bodenhamer argues,
deep maps are “visual, time-based genuinely multimedia and multilayered” 
(Bodenhemer, 11). These maps allow for nuanced spatial analysis in the service
of new humanities questions and arguments. We will focus on the application of
these concepts in a new extension of Photogrammar (photogrammar.yale.edu), a
digital and public humanities project focused on print and visual culture in
1930s America.

Photogrammar (photogrammar.yale.edu) uses methods from the digital humanities
and digital resources to further contextualize and open new avenues of research
into the federal project and documentary record of the era. In its current
version, Photogrammar maps 170,000 photos from the Great Depression and World
War II that comprise the United States Farm Security Administration and Office
of War Information (FSA-OWI) photographic archive. Importantly, the collection
includes some of the most prominent documentary photographers of the
20th century including Dorothea Lange and Walker Evans. Users can explore the
collection through interactive maps through the use of spatial analysis; search
by photo captions, photographer and time through text analysis; and browse by
color and the faces depicted in the photographs through the use of image
analysis. This new stage - funded by the American Council of Learned Societies-
involves adding a new layer to Photogrammar - the Federal Writer’s Project
(FWP), which funded writers to capture and describe the complexities of
American life during the Great Depression (Couch, Hirsch, Mangione,
Penkower, Stewart). Dozens of writers were sent to document through words the
impact of the great depression on people's lives across the country. Prominent
literary scholars such as Nelson Algren, known for The Man with the Golden Arm
, and Ralph Ellison, known for Invisible Man. In the process, they asked people
to provide their life histories pioneering the practice of oral history, a
critical methodology in the field of history and in the humanities more
broadly.

Using deep mapping to expand our understanding of 1930s America, Photogrammar
is creating links across archives in order to place the FSA-OWI in the larger
federal effort to document America during the Great Depression. Merging
collections from the University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Libraries
and the Library of Congress, the FWP includes over 4,000 life histories.
Interviews are being plotted on a new geographical layer allowing search by
space and time. For example, a user will be able to follow an interviewer as
they move across a state and the country to collect oral histories in the same
way they can now follow documentary photographs like Dorothea Lange and Walker
Evans. Users will be able to search the new FWP layer independently or
along with the geographical layer of FSA-OWI photographs and photographers. As
a result, they will be able to compare the oral histories to the photographs
taken in the same area allowing user to compare and contrast the documentary
record created and funded by the federal government. As well, the new and
cleaned transcripts created over this year are allowing for refined search
functionality including faceted browsing and full text search. We are
also experimenting with the role Natural Language Processing techniques such as
Named-Entity Recognition to create new ways to browse the collection (Finkel
and Manning 2005). In all, users will be able to explore the FWP and FSA-OWI
spatially, temporally and through faceted searching allowing the public to
explore the broader documentary record of the era relationally through deep
mapping.

The second half of the paper will focus on methodology. We will start by
discussing the potential benefits and potential difficulties of
cross-institution collaboration in the cleaning and processing of data. In our
experience, working with institutionally and spatially separated groups
requires careful planning, but this extra up-front work improves both the
general workflow and final products. We will touch on what scholarly and which
technical questions guided our creation of a database schema for inputting
metadata from the Federal Writer's Project. We take into consideration
theoretical work regarding the creation of "smart data", best practices
regarding TEI markup (Schoch, TEI Initiative on Libraries), and principles
for creating normalized database tables (Codd 1971). The discussion will
culminate in showing how these carefully curated data sources are made
interactive and public on our website. The geographic data are plotted using
custom layers created in CARTO (formerly CartoDB), giving a great deal of
interactivity out of the box. Specifically, we will extrapolate on how we
designed the interactivity to enhance the other data collections on the
Photogrammar website, to make new arguments and pose new questions about about
documentary expression in 1930s America, to realize the principles of deep
mapping and to engage with various publics.

Mapping Silicon Valley

Jason Heppler

“Mapping Silicon Valley” explores the role of spatial history in the urban
environment of post-World War II Santa Clara Valley. Silicon Valley is the
product of competing landscapes. The geographer D. W. Meinig refers to
landscapes as “a naive acceptance of the intricate intermingling of physical,
biological, and cultural features which any glance around us displays" (Meinig,
1979). Wildlife refuges, fenced military installations, city and neighborhood
districts, and polluted sites all hold definitions on the land.
Historian Richard White has referred to this as "hybrid landscapes," where
cultural ideologies clash over conflicting uses of natural resources. The
hybrid landscape is neither purely wild nor purely built, but instead a
construction of natural and cultural systems that shape and create place
(White, 2004). People define places by embedding ideas on the landscape.
In cities, urban planners lay down grids of roads, zones, and regulations that
divide cities along labor, leisure, and consumption, thus imbuing certain
places with particular meaning. Landscapes, as Meinig notes, are “a great
exhibit of consequences," and are “symbolic, as expressions of cultural values,
social behavior, and individual actions worked upon particular localities over
a span of time" (Meinig, 1979).

By viewing Silicon Valley through the lens of landscapes and space, I argue for
the importance of place in shaping a suburban vision of what urban historian
Margaret O'Mara has called high-tech urbanism. Silicon Valley has come to
represent the future of post-industrial economic development. Places as varied
as Atlanta, Georgia; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Cleveland, Ohio; Omaha,
Nebraska; Bangalore, India; Mission Hills in the Guandong Province of China;
and Shenzhen, China, have looked to Silicon Valley as a model for economic and
urban revitalization through high-tech economic development. Indeed, high tech
is often drenched in green--from high-tech office campuses to "smart cities"
that promise to transform work, leisure, transportation, and urban space into a
more sustainable future.

The work of this high-tech landscape has been decades in the making and has
come with high environmental costs, despite the promise of clean and green
cities. Silicon Valley epitomized the trend of conflating a lack of smokestacks
as a proxy for sustainable industrial development. High-tech landscapes
centered around industrial research and scientific industry promised growth
without pollution, but that promise was an impossible standard.

"Mapping Silicon Valley" is a broad discussion of three map-centric projects
that have moved through different stages. The first set of maps were data
driven thematic maps, produced largely during the course of my dissertation
research. These maps were created largely out of a desire to understand the
transforming landscape in Silicon Valley, from city growth and conflicts over
urban space to the widespread presence of pollution and neighborhoods most
threatened by toxic chemicals. The first section of this paper will reflect on
the methodological underpinnings of these maps and their application to
environmental humanities, while also discussing some of the potential
shortcomings and enhancements that would make these maps more useful for
historical research.

The Pollution Landscape, 1970—2000

[267-4]

SUPERFUND SITE

ComDany: Westinghouse Electric Corp. (Sunnyvale

Date added: 6/10/1986 Date deleted: N/A Address: 401 Hendy Avenue

Notes:^LThe^l75?acre^> Westinghouse Electric Corporation c (Sunnyvale Plant)
site was formerly used to manufacture electrical transformers. It is currently
used to manufacture steam generators, marine propulsion systems, and missile
launching systems for the Department of Defense. Groundwater contamination
is believed to have resulted from a leaking polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
storage tank and from localized spills. Most of the contaminated areas on site
have been removed and/or have been paved over. Access to the site is
restricted. Approximately 710,000 people live • ^1

lA/ithin throo miloc nf tho cito Tho noareset rooirlonno io

Don Edwards’

ipertino

Campbell

® Show Superfund sites 0 Show companies 0 Show toxic sites and spills

About the Map

In December 1981, Fairchild Semiconductor identified a chemical leak in one of
its solvents storage tanks in South San Jose. A nearby well operated by the
Great Oakes Water Company was discovered contaminated and promptly shut down,
but neighbors in the area had for years wondered about the miscarriages,
birth defects, stillbirths, and other health issues affecting their families.
When news of the chemical leak broke in January 1982, neighborhoods began to
question just how clean the "clean" industries of high tech really
were. Subsequent investigations by state, county, and city government and the
Environmental Protection Agency discovered widespread chemical leaks throughout
the San Francisco Peninsula, many of which became eligible for Superfund
funding. Out of twenty-nine sites investigated by the EPA, twenty-four were
placed on

San Jose Annexations, 1850—2000

[267-5]

The second mapping project is oriented around digital public history. Called
Silicon Valley Historical (http://svhistorical.org) and built on the
Curatescape platform, the project seeks to collect archival material and
narrate the importance of specific places to the Valley's history.
Contributions to Silicon Valley Historical are not solely driven by
scholarly contributions, but also rely on contributions by students and
volunteers in close association with area universities, colleges, historical
associations, and historical societies. The material contained in
Silicon Valley Historical is meant, in part, to step away from the
business-centric stories so often associated with Silicon Valley and consider
more fully the urban spaces that were affected by the growth of this
high-tech region. Still in its early stages of planning, this section will
discuss the challenge of working with community partners and developing a
sustainable and scalable digital history project that seeks to serve both
the community it studies as well as students and scholars who will find the
project useful.

The final mapping project, still under planning and a partnership with the
Stanford Spatial History Project, is tentatively titled From Orchards to
Suburbs: Changing Landscapes in Silicon Valley and will represent the most
technological and research heavy aspects of the project. As I investigate the
politics surrounding the creation of place, this project will allow for the
spatial exploration of zoning laws, general plans, government reports, and city
council meeting minutes. The current design envisages the ability to navigate
through a map and, depending on the viewport, presenting a list of primary
sources available for reading about particular places in Silicon Valley. These
will be accompanied by some computational and statistical tools for doing
text analysis to uncover more about the kinds of conversations happening about
particular places in the city and how they are being thought about.

Collectively, "Mapping Silicon Valley" will critically reflect on these
projects and their evolution as research and public history projects. The paper
will further delve into the opportunities for deep mapping and interactivity
for exploring the changing landscapes of Silicon Valley.

