Virtual Hamlet: Combining Motion Capture and Real Time Digital Puppetry

Augustus Wendell

wendell@njit.edu

New Jersey Institute of Technology United States of America

Louis Wells

wells@njit.edu

New Jersey Institute of Technology United States of America

As a theatrical production, Hamlet poses a particular directorial challenge:
the Ghost. How should an apparition be presented onstage alongside
mortal characters? Traditional Shakespearean theatre presented apparitions
using theatrical effects to visually separate these characters from the
mortal characters. Modern theatrical productions must address this same issue
with every new staging. Solving this question can help lay a clear
conceptual footing for the rest of the production's conceptual considerations.
A recent production in New York City in 2015 directed by Austin Pendleton opted
to make the Ghost invisible to everyone but those guards who first encounter
him, and once Hamlet sees him, only Hamlet. This decision rendered Hamlet
mentally disturbed in the eyes of the audience (Isherwood 2017). Kenneth
Branagh's cinematic Hamlet in 1996 created a ghost that had a “special effects
and a horrorfilm look.” (Maslin 1996) This approach favors brutal realism
expected in modern cinema. These two approaches represent extremes in
production solutions to the ghost; psychological illness, and pale faces in
armor.

When Hamlet was first produced, the Elizabethan stage was full of special
effects (Brockett, Franklin 2008). Shakespeare was a practitioner of
special effects technology such as pyrotechnics, rope and pulley and trap
doors. His commitment to authenticity and effect even led to the accidental
destruction of a theater by fire in 1613 after the use of a
cannon-based special effect. As conceived by faculty in a theatre program and a
digital effects design department at the same university, the challenge of
representing the ghost and the Shakespearean spirit of theatrical effect became
an opportunity for collaboration. This was our opportunity to create a new type
of ghost, one that bridges the traditions of theater and cutting
edge interactive media.

Theater has a history of stage projections dating from the 1700's use of magic
lantern devices (Figure 1) to the 1920's when innovators like Erwin Piscator

[274-1]

Figure 1. A magic lantern projector device.

[274-2]

Figure 2. Erwin Piscator staging of Sturmflut, 1926 with projected imagery.

Throughout the twentieth century there was an extraordinary growth in the
implementation of projections from experimental to mainstream theater (Theatre
Communications Group 2011). While the size and complexity of projections has
grown over time they have been until recently static or pre-recorded. With
emerging technologies such as Microsoft's Kinect Camera and Derivative
Software's TouchDesigner projections can be an interactive, responsive
addition to the live theatrical experience. Our collaboration utilized these
technologies in creation of our ghost. Theatre has a long tradition of
extending the body in performance. Costumes, makeup and prosthetics are the
bread-and-butter of the art. Greek theatre used large scale masks and costumes
to amplify theatrical expression, while Elizabethan theatre utilized
extreme makeup applications and costuming for supernatural characters. Physical
puppetry provides a clear mechanism to extend the performative and
expressive capabilities of the actor. There are, however, some practical
limitations to the physical puppetry approach: the movement and visual effect
of the puppet is limited to the physical realities of the performer. Pushing
beyond these boundaries, cinema has used digital motion capture to create
such characters as Gollum in the Lord of the Rings trilogy and the recent
Planet of the Apes films. Andy Serkis, an actor known for his motion captured
performances, states, “Performance capture is a tool that allows actors to
transform themselves into many different characters. You're not confined by
physicality. You can play anything” (Hart 2017). Advances in virtual staging
and performance capture, notably used in the production of the film Avatar,
have extended motion capture for characters into the real time realm.

Although hybrid physical/digital stagings have been undertaken before (Meador,
W. Scott, et al 2009, Bermudez et al 2002), the field has not kept pace
with rapidly evolving technology. Our production combined recent advances in
inexpensive real-time motion capture with the theoretical underpinnings
of theatrical puppetry to perform a spatio-digital character in a live
theatrical venue. A Kinect sensor on stage captured the movements of a physical
actor performing the ghost. This data was manipulated in Derivative Software
TouchDesigner and optically projected as an abstract digital apparition back
onto the stage concurrent to the performance (Figures 3, 4). The virtual puppet
became at once puppet and avatar, both extending and replacing the physical
body of the actor. The dual space of this performance, half bodysized space of
the actor and half virtualized space of the projected apparition, plays to the
notion of the Cybrid space (Anders 1999).

[274-3]

Figure 3. Technical rehearsal still from the NJIT 2016 Hamlet Performance.

[274-4]

Figure 4. Production still from the NJIT 2016 Hamlet Performance.

This poster contextualizes, describes and presents the Spring 2016 theatrical
production of Hamlet at the New Jersey Institute of Technology featuring
a digitally created projected parametric Ghost character performed in real time
by a motion-captured onstage actor.

