Copyright, Digital

Humanities, and Global Geographies of Knowledge

Vika Zafrin

vzafrin@bu.edu

Boston University, United States of America

Isabel Galina Russell

igalina@unam.mx

Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico

Alex Gil

colibri.alex@gmail.com

Columbia University, United States of America

Padmini Ray Murray

p.raymurray@gmail.com

Srishti Institute for Art, Design and Technology, India

Copyright is controversial and murky. By any name, it refers to rights
connected to original works. In some countries, emphasis is on the rights of
authors or distributors of a work; in others, public good is given prominence.
In most places it’s a combination of the two. Significant commercial and
personal interests are involved, and the advent of the internet has redefined
distribution; and so copyright laws are constantly changing. Although the
notion of intellectual property exists in almost all countries its significance
and actual implementation varies as does the degree to which the counter
balancing rights of access to information are implemented and supported.

In digital humanities, copyright is implicated in multiple ways. As with all
scholarship, book and article publishing is fraught with rights transfers
embedded in publishing contracts, and subsequent publisher practices that often
impede scholarly progress. Other copyright issues are unique to DH. Who
holds copyright to what part of a collaborative, web-based project? What is the
difference, and what are the intersections, between having, protecting,
and exercising legal rights on one hand, and being given proper credit on the
other?

We propose a DH2017 panel to discuss these issues, with an eye toward helping
DH practitioners make better informed decisions regarding the new knowledge
they create. More importantly, though, we aim to spur a community conversation
about copyright as an area in which digital humanists have agency as knowledge
producers, not just as consumers. The rapid worldwide expansion of
digital humanities work demands that we begin to deal with the complex tangle
of rights around digital humanities knowledge production before others do it
for us.

This conversation has not yet happened at the DH conference or in the field at
large in a robust way. Copyright is mentioned usually as an issue around using
third-party materials, an obstacle or a limitation for a particular project
(Neuman, Greent, Unsworth 1997; Evenson 1999; Lord 1999; Ben-Porat,
Reich, Behrendt 2002). We were unable to locate conference abstracts that
addressed copyright and intellectual property issues for the new knowledge
produced. Workshop-type events on DH and copyright tend also to take a more
applied approach, on how third-party copyright affects the project. Two
related conversations are taking place, though. One is about labor in academe
at large and in DH in particular (Keralis, Burgess and Hamming, Anderson et
al, Flanders); the other is about access to knowledge as a social justice
issue—what access to scholarship means in terms of power distribution,
perpetuating systemic inequalities in academe and outside it (Risam et
al, Chenier, Faull et al). We think that our panel will contribute to this
conversation. Considering questions of labor from the perspective of rights to
knowledge produced potentially clarifies, and makes more expansive, our
collective notion of where labor exists in a digital humanities project. And,
thinking of the knowledge we produce in terms of rights we possess to it
highlights our agency as individual contributors. This enables us to consider
whether our individual and collective practice around author rights promotes or
impedes our work’s overall contribution to society.

We envision this panel beginning with a 10-12 minute presentation from each
panelist on the topics described below, followed by a discussion with
the audience.

Isabel Galina Russell will speak on the long tradition of Open Access
publishing in Latin America and discuss how this may have impacted the way
in which DH resources are produced, disseminated and published in this region.
She will draw on examples of DH projects in the region and analyse the
copyright situation, as well as present the results of conversations with DH
creators and their attitudes and experiences with copyright in relation to
their work.

Alex Gil will address the intersection between shadow libraries, digital
humanities, vendor databases and digital libraries. Departing from the research
work of the Piracy Lab and the Group for Experimental Methods in the Humanities
at Columbia University, Gil will argue that our burgeoning global, hybrid
republic of letters is being shaped in specific ways by the relationship of
specific sectors of society to intellectual property. In a sense, Gil argues,
architectures of humanistic knowledge are being produced by these different
sectors, where the end product may resemble each other, but in large part due
to the work of intellectual property laws, the labor conditions and social
impact are quite different. The talk will conclude with a series of proposals
for future humanistic research in the burgeoning area of what Alan Liu
calls "critical infrastructure studies."

Padmini Ray Murray will address how the global hegemonies of knowledge
production, ownership and circulation are challenged by creation
and consumption practices in India, as embodied by the landmark ruling of the
Delhi High Court in 2016, which dismissed suits filed by three international
publishers who alleged that the circulation of photocopied material was an
infringement of copyright. This will contextualise Ray Murray’s consequent
discussion of how both academic publishing and conventions of copyright are
largely colonial legacies, and how this case marks a significant moment in the
decolonisation of the Indian university and intellectual life. Ray Murray will
demonstrate how practices in Indian language publishing might exemplify
alternatives to dominant regimes, as well as how digital spaces and practices
can and are already fostering an emergent model of humanities scholarship
different than that found in the global North.

Vika Zafrin will give a brief overview of the current state of copyright in the
United States as it relates to academic work from both the consumer/reader/user
and the creator/author points of view. She will touch on some struggles
academic libraries face in the current scholarly publishing climate, and
describe strategies some institutions have adopted to improve the situation,
including open access policies and an access-oriented approach to stewardship
of digital (or digitized) scholarly materials given to libraries for archival
and preservation. Zafrin will compare the institution- and funding-agency-level
approaches to open access generally taken in the U.S. to those seen in
some European countries (and in Europe as a whole via the Europeana project),
highlighting differences and comparing their effectiveness while taking
account what is possible in the respective political and legislative climates.
She will briefly discuss some representative collaborations between
U.S. researchers and colleagues worldwide, and their treatment of rights
issues. Finally, she will make some suggestions for resources DH practitioners
can use to make decisions about rights claims and attribution in their
projects.

