Augmented dance scholarship: computer-assisted analysis of Javanese dance

Miguel Escobar Varela

m.escobar@nus.edu.sg

National University of Singapore, Singapore

Luis Carlos Hernández Barraza

a0107963@u.nus.edu

National University of Singapore, Singapore

This case study of Javanese dance argues that biomechanical analysis of dance
can be used to augment dance scholarship: quantitative biomechanical data can
complement rather than supplant other kinds of dance scholarship. In proposing
this, we draw a parallel to the vision of computer assisted-literary
criticism presented by Sinclair and Rockwell (2016), where interpretive textual
analytics enable different readings of a text or corpus, rather than a quest
for scientific truth. Similarly, we suggest that the visualization
of biomechanical data enables other ways of looking at dance.

Our research project continues a long history of recording dance movements, but
also departs from previous projects in important ways. Different notation
systems, recording media and technological tools have been developed in order
to capture the fleeting quality of dances. A few well-known examples include
Eadweard Muybridge's photographic series depicting dance movements in the 19^th
century, the Labanotation system developed by Rudolf von Laban in the early 20^
th century and the application of biomechanics to study ballet in the 1970s, as
exemplified by the papers in the conference At the Dance: Verities, Values,
Visions: Binational Dance Conference in Waterloo, Ontario in 1971.

The practical applications of these systems and methods have been justified
along several lines: the transmission of choreographies, dance pedagogy,
description and classification of dance movements, and injury prevention.
Initial enthusiasm for the scientific study of dance waned after the 1970s and
has had little impact in mainstream dance scholarship. Recording
of choreographies using Labanotation and motion-capture devices are still very
common, but the quantitative analysis of the data obtained in this way is not.

In a parallel development, choreographers and dance collectives often use
dance-tracking systems and visualizations as part of their work; notable
examples of such practitioners include William Forsythe, Si-ohban Davis, Merce
Cunningham, Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker and BADco. Unlike the quantitative
studies of dance, these creative uses of dance data within performances are
widely celebrated within dance scholarship and practice (Bleeker 2016). These
playful uses of data and visualization are mostly constrained to creative dance
practice. Even if they are often discussed within dance scholarship they are
not often deployed as analytical approaches within dance scholarship. Our
present study shows a way in which this could change.

Combining methods from dance ethnography and biomechanical engineering, we
recorded differences in the building blocks of a well-known Javanese dance: 
Sendratari Ramayana. The Sendratari (often translated as ballet) is a modern
Indonesian dance practice that combines movement gestures from royal
dance traditions (beksa and srimpi), and from classical operatic dance-dramas (
wayang wong) in order to present stories from the Ramayana (the Sanskrit epic
that provides narrative background for many performance forms in South and
Southeast Asia). We were interested in the “body types”, a series of rules that
describe how the main five types of characters should move: lu-ruh (extremely
refined), lanyap (vigorous-refined), ga-gah (vigorous), raksasa (ogres), wanara
(simians), and manuk (birds). These rules define the rhythm and body angles at
which the same movements (standing, walking, fighting, etc.) are performed by
each character.

[279-1]

Figure 1. The dancer performs the standing motion corresponding to a bird. The
movement can be seen as an animation of all major limbs and as graphs carting
the movement of each joint through time.

For our study, we placed markers in all major joints of a professional dancer
and we asked him to perform all basic movements as would befit each body type.
Using the resulting data, we calculated the range of motion for each joint
(difference between the maximum and the lowest angles). By comparing the ranges
of motion pertaining to different body types, we discovered that the more
subtle, elegant body types have the biggest range of motion. This is surprising
even to experienced dance scholars. The demons and monkeys hold their arms in
wider gestures and it would be easy to conclude that they have wider ranges of
motion. The movement of the refined characters is slower and one can easily
lose track of the fact that these movements actually require a greater range of
motion. Indeed, similar assertions are absent in the literature. Our goal is to
present our results through two interactive web displays:

• As a series of video panels, where a user can see a particular movement
performed by a particular body type. Different videos can be displayed
together: a recording of the dancer, an animation showing the position of the
markers, and animated graphs that show the movement of specific joints (Fig.
1).

• Graphs that show a comparative overview of all movement types. For example,
using Principal Component Analysis (a method often used in textual scholarship
in the DH), we generated a comparison of the different body types (Fig. 2).

graphs as hermeneutica, interpretive toys that can change how a scholar looks
at a particular cultural practice (dance in our case, text in theirs). Like
them, we see our results “not as microscopes revealing the inner structure, but
as augmentations adding to a history of interpretation” (Sinclair and Rockwell
2016: 101). Rich, qualitative descriptions of “body types” across multiple
Javanese art-forms (puppetry, dance and dance-dramas) are available in previous
dance scholarship and in ethnographies of Java. Dancers and scholars have
developed evocative metaphors to describe the qualities of movement.

Our study constitutes the first systematic measurement of the differences among
“body types” in Javanese dance but its goal is not to disprove previous
scholarship. Our main interest is to explore how visualizations of our research
data can be used to help scholars look at dance differently. We suggest a
way forward for dance scholarship where interactive displays allow multiple
ways of understanding dance, at the crossroads of ethnography, dance criticism
and quantitative biomechanical analysis.

