DH Box

Jojo Karlin

jkarlin@gradcenter.cuny.edu

The Graduate Center, CUNY, United States of America

Patrick Smyth

patricksmyth01@gmail.com

The Graduate Center, CUNY, United States of America

Stephen Zweibel

szweibel@gc.cuny.edu

The Graduate Center, CUNY, United States of America

Matthew K. Gold

mgold@gc.cuny.edu

The Graduate Center, CUNY, United States of America

This poster session will introduce DH Box, a browser-based platform that
provides access to a variety of difficult-to-install digital humanities
tools. Currently under development at The Graduate Center, CUNY, and funded by
generous assistance from an NEH Startup Grant, DH Box is designed with
particular attention to digital humanities pedagogy. Because teaching DH
requires infrastructure of various kinds, including computing resources, IT
support, and teachers with specialized training, student access to the digital
humanities is unevenly distributed and highly dependent on local institutional
conditions. Faculty with DH skills are often called upon to teach classes
and workshops in adverse circumstances, contending with limited access to labs
or other computing resources, restrictive IT policies that prevent new software
from being installed, and platform fragmentation on student-owned machines. As
a cloud-based platform, DH Box was conceived to address some of these
concerns by providing a set of digital humanities tools through a unified
computing environment accessed through the browser.

DH Box is not a service, nor is it a standalone application that runs on local
computers. Rather, it is software that can be set up by teachers or
institutions on cloud-based infrastructure such as Amazon Web Services or
DigitalOcean. DH Box is an open-source project developed by and for teachers
and researchers in the humanities, and as such is intended to provide
an alternative to proprietary services that prevent access to user data. DH Box
also makes an intervention in terms of design, UX, and usability. The platform
uses a virtualization technology called Docker to quickly create and remove
digital working environments, providing students with access to either shared
work spaces or individualized virtual machines. Each of these environments
contains a set of tools and utilities frequently used in the digital
humanities, including IPy-thon Notebooks, the Natural Language Toolkit, MALLET,
Omeka, and WordPress. DH Box's tab-based browsing interface makes it possible
to easily switch between these utilities, the command line, and a text editor.
In addition to providing DH tools in a unified computing environment, the
platform offers resources in partnership with institutions like the British
Library, making digitized texts available for student exploration. By
integrating Git Lit, a tool for downloading text corpora developed in
partnership with Columbia University, DH Box provides access not only to
digital humanities tools, but also to materials for analysis
and experimentation.

Even as it aims to circumvent institutional barriers to DH scholarship, DH Box
addresses broader questions of access to DH tools. The necessity for
specialized knowledge--use of the command line, importing packages and modules,
configuring a working envi-ronment--may deter students from pursuing
research questions using these novel methods. Making these tools more
accessible, on the other hand, should help encourage a new generation of DH
scholars. By allowing teachers and students to bypass the difficult process of
installation and configuration, the DH Box team hopes to give them room to
focus on exploration and experimentation. During the DH Box poster
presentation, team members will be available to discuss decisions of design as
well as future use cases.

Resources

For more information about DH Box, please refer to: Dhbox.org | @DH_Box |
https://github.com/DH-Box

