The Extended Language of Religious Reform:

Marking Up a Register for Early Modern Sermons

Thomas Winn Dabbs

tdabbs@cl.aoyama.ac.jp

Aoyama Gakuin University, Tokyo, Japan

This talk will report on the formation of an online open source register for
early modern English sermons, a collaborative effort that includes scholars and
technical experts from North America, the United Kingdom, and Japan. The need
for a digital register of early modern sermons is abundantly clear to
scholars who specialize in the history of the church and religious practice.
Sermons were, for better or worse, central to efforts to broadcast and enforce
disquieting religious reforms and to address the unsettling controversies in
religious practice during the early modern period. It should be stressed, also,
that a well-constructed and user-friendly platform of this nature would reach
the many among the general public who are interested in the history of religion
in general and in Christian church history in particular.

The term register is used here to denote a comprehensive and searchable list of
English sermons, sermon events, and related sermon information from a variety
of contemporaneous records and sources during the period 1500 to 1700,
including sermons delivered to English audiences in Latin will also be
catalogued. This project will not attempt to digitalize full texts of print or
manuscript sermons.

Extant sermons were often printed long after they were delivered and many
remain separately catalogued in manuscript. Non-extant sermons are known about
from disparate sources: chronicles, diaries, private correspondence, and
records of church and state. This lack of cohesion creates something of
a vacuum amidst a plethora of sources that make reference to preaching in
general and also to individual sermons. The goal of this project, therefore, is
to bring to a list of sermons the cataloguing and search functionality (on a
much smaller scale) that the British Library Short Title Catalogue (ESTC)
online currently affords printed works.

There have been efforts recently to explore and document sermons during this
period in digital formats but with differing objectives. These efforts include
digital platforms in early development such as the announcement to ‘Gateway to
Early Modern Manuscript Sermons’ (GEMMS), as well as digital projects such as
The St Paul's Cathedral Project (formerly the Virtual Paul's Cross Project) and
John Foxe’s The Acts and Monuments Online. Standard resources for this project
are, of course, the ESTC Online, EEBO-TCP, and for later reprints of
early modern sermons Internet Archive has become increasingly useful. A host of
fine scholars have been drawn to the study of early modern sermons, but this
field has lacked an annotated and comprehensive register of sermons and sermon
events.

The developers of this project will use a TEI-compliant XML structure. Much of
the platform can be encoded with standardized markups for such elements as
date, speaker, and location. However, this project is faced with the task of
identifying and defining elements for a register in a space between digital
bibliography and online textual archives or corpora.

Metadata will have to be extended to include an abundant number of tags for
such areas as theological debate (e.g. purgatory, Eucharist) and church
practice (e.g. baptism, burial). An exhaustive list of metaconcepts peculiar to
the religious attitudes and movements of the period will have to be
constructed. Among the many examples, such meta-tags as “antitheatre,”
“Anabaptist,” and “recantation,” will have to be identified, agreed upon, and
listed.

In sum, the greatest challenge for this project is in developing a
comprehensive taxonomy for its metadata. In the view of the project team, the
best way to approach this challenge is to start small and to learn by doing.
Phase 1 of this project, therefore, is to digitalize and annotate Millar
Maclure’s register of the sermons of Paul’s Cross along with the supplement
to this edition.

Paul’s Cross, the outdoor preaching pulpit located on the northeast side of the
St Paul’s precinct in early modern London, will be treated as ground zero for
the cataloguing of early modern sermons. Located in the commercial and cultural
center of London, Paul’s Cross was the most influential public site for
preaching to large, non-elite audiences in England during tumultuous periods of
religious reform. This one locale had an immeasurable impact on
Christian practice and public opinion from the Henrican period until the years
leading up to the Civil War.

As the project expands toward its goal of being a comprehensive annotated
register for all early

modern sermons, the TEI XML encoding and extensions will allow scaling to a
much larger platform. During Phase 1 the metadata arrangement for developers
will be clarified. Should problems or omissions arise, which they invariably
do, the fix can be made before the project expands. Finally, given that TEI has
become the standard for what will become a partner project, this encoding will
be highly adaptable should it eventually be contributed to a digital
archive repository or OAIS.

