Dazzle them with Baffles: Gauging Attitudes toward Digital Fabrication in
an Online Musicians' Community

Brian Greenspan

brian.greenspan@carleton.ca Carleton University, Canada

This paper presents a project, currently underway, that combines 3D fabrication
and digital audio processing with text mining and sentiment analysis to gauge
attitudes toward digital fabrication processes (and maker culture more
generally) among a large online community of musicians.

In the last two years, traditional musical instrument manufacturing materials
have been joined by laser-sintered plastics and photopolymer resins, as new
Additive Manufacturing techniques have been employed either to replicate
vintage instrument parts, or redesign them altogether. In no case, however,
have digital fabrication methods managed to entirely displace artisanal
tradition.

This study explores how digital fabrication has been negotiated by one large
and active online musician’s community that values artistry, craft,
and industrial history alike. Using low-end desktop 3D fabrication methods with
open-source software, I am reproducing a line of replica instrument parts
based on vintage originals. Once all reproductions are complete, I plan to
engage a professional musician to test-play the printed replicas, and compare
them with their original vintage models. These tests will be recorded using
audio freeware, and shared with members of a select online musician’s
community, in order to determine whether they distinguish my 3D-prints from
their original models.

My aim is less to determine whether these replicas are in fact morphologically
and sonically identical to their period models than to determine how 3D
digital fabrication is received by musicians strongly devoted to vintage
equipment and artisanal craft. Using the Python Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK
3.0) with a naïve Bayes classifier trained on a valenced wordlist (e.g. AFINN),
I will conduct sentiment analyses of the online forum to gauge how the
community of musicians responds to the introduction of new manufacturing
techniques that are neither industrial nor conventionally artisanal.

Ultimately, this project addresses the “emergence” of digital humanities (Jones
2013) into artisanal practices as a sign of our contemporary
“post-digital” condition, under which we need “no longer talk about digital
versus analog but instead about modulations of the digital or different
intensities of the computational” (Berry 2014). By engaging one active and
prominent community of analog musicians in a discussion of digital fabrication,
I hope to use their insights into the materiality of music production
to address questions crucial to maker epistemology, such as: “For which
methodologies do tactility and texture especially matter?,” and “When is
scholarly communication most persuasive off the screen?” (Sayers 2015).

