Aesthetic Appreciation and Spanish Art: Insights from Eye-Tracking

Claire Bailey-Ross

claire.bailey-ross@port.ac.uk

University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom

Andrew Beresford

a.m.beresford@durham.ac.uk

Durham University, United Kingdom

Daniel Smith

daniel.smith2@durham.ac.uk

Durham University, United Kingdom

Claire Warwick

c.l.h.warwick@durham.ac.uk

Durham University, United Kingdom

Introduction

How do people look at and experience art? Which elements of specific artworks
do they focus on? Do museum labels have an impact on how people look
at artworks? The viewing experience of art is a complex one, involving issues
of perception, attention, memory, decision-making, affect, and emotion. Thus,
the time it takes and the ways of visually exploring an artwork can inform
about its relevance, interestingness, and even its aesthetic appeal. This paper
describes a collaborative pilot project focusing on a unique collection of 17th
Century Zurbaran paintings. The Jacob cycle at Auckland Castle is the only UK
example of a continental collection preserved in situ in purpose-built
surroundings. While studies of the psychology of art have focused on individual
works and distinctions between representative/non-representative topics, no
work has been completed on the aesthetic appreciation of collections or
of devotional themes. In this paper, we report upon the novel insights
eye-tracking techniques have provided into the unconscious processes of viewing
the unique collection of Zurbaran artworks. The purpose of this pilot study was
to assess the effects of different written interpretation on the visual
exploration of artworks. We will discuss the potential implications of these
techniques and our understanding of visual behaviours on museum and gallery
practice. The project brings together established research strengths in Spanish
art history, experimental psychology, digital humanities, and museum studies to
explore, using eye-tracking techniques, aesthetic reactions to digital
representations of the individual Zurbaran artworks as well as the significance
of the collection as a whole.

Overview

Our experience of art develops from the interaction of several cognitive and
affective processes; the beginning of which is a visual scan of the
artwork. When regarding an artwork, a viewer gathers information through a
series fixations, interspersed by rapid movements of the eye called saccades.
The direction of saccades is determined by an interaction between the goals of
the observer and the physical properties of the different elements of the scene
(e.g. colour, texture, brightness etc). Importantly, studying eye movements
offers an insight that does not depend on the participants’ beliefs, memories
or subjective impressions of the artwork. Previous eye tracking research has
highlighted the potential to transform the ways we understand visual processing
in the arts (see for example Brieber 2014; Binderman et al., 2005) and at the
same time offers a direct way of studying several important factors of a museum
visit (Filippini Fantoni et al., 2013; Heidenreich & Turano 2011;
Milekic 2010).

Zurbaran’s cycle of Jacob and his Sons has been on display in the Long Room at
Auckland Castle for over 250 years. It is the only cycle to be preserved
in purpose-built surroundings in the UK, and one of very few of its kind in the
world. It has a long history in scholarship (Baron & Beresford 2014), but many
key aspects of its production and significance have not yet been fully
understood. In this study we used eyetracking in the first stage of exploring
audience experience of the extensive Spanish art collections of County Durham,
of which the 13 Zurbaran artworks (there are actually only 12 Zurbaran
artworks, the 13 th Benjamin, is a copy by Arthur Pond) are a key part of, to
investigate the ways in which audiences look at Spanish art, how aesthetic
experience is evaluated and whether audiences can be encouraged to approach art
in different ways. This pilot project primarily investigated how participants
visually explore artworks and provides new insights into the potential
eye-tracking has to transform the ways we understand visual processing in arts
and culture and at the same time offer a direct way of studying
several important factors of a museum visit, namely to assess the effects of
label characteristics on visitor visual behaviour.

Method

The aim of this study was to determine whether the accompanying written context
influences how digital artworks are visually experienced. Whether contextual
information impacts on where participants first look (first fixation), if
gallery labels influence the time participants choose to view artworks
and, especially, whether it influences their aesthetic appreciation of the
works. We expected viewing time for artworks and corresponding labels to be
predicted by participants’ subjective experiences, artwork related features,
and contextual factors. Accordingly, we measured viewing time, fixation, and
saccades for each artwork and corresponding label using a fixed eye tracking
technology (Tobii TX300) in a laboratory setting.

Forty Six students from the University of Durham participated in this study.
All participants had normal or corrected vision, no formal training in arts or
art history and received course credit for taking part. All participants gave
informed consent. The study was approved by Durham University’s Department
of Psychology Ethics committee. A third of the participants were randomly
assigned to the Museum Context group (nMC =16), who inspected digital images of
the paintings in conjunction with the contextualizing labels currently in use
at Auckland Castle, which rely heavily on relating the content of individual
compositions to the words of Jacob in Genesis 49; a third to the Aesthetic
Context group (nAC = 15), who received labels foregrounding issues of aesthetic
and interpretive interest; and the final third to the No Context group (nNC =
15), who received only basic attribution data: title of composition, name
and date of artist, date of composition, and nature of medium (i.e. “oil on
canvas”).

All stimuli were taken from Auckland Castle’s collection of Jacob and his
Twelve Sons by Francisco de Zurbarán. Each participant viewed
high-resolution digital reproductions of the original artworks presented on the
Tobii TX300 screen based eyetracker. The stimuli were presented in the
same sequence for all participants.

Results

Previous authors have shown that when a human being is portrayed in a painting,
gazing behaviour is mostly focused on the human figure, independently
of contextual elements also depicted in the image. In particular, attention is
given to the face area, and it plays a fundamental role in aesthetic judgment
(Ro et al., 2007; Massaro et al., 2012; Villani et al., 2015). Given these
considerations, three key regions of interest (ROI) were identified; the head,
the clothes and the contextualising element. Saccades and fixations were
identified offline in Tobii Studio using the default algorithm (onset/offset
criterion of 70 degrees/second and a minimum dwell time of 80ms). The key
variables of interest for each ROI were (1) Frequency of First Fixation, (2)
Time to First Fixation and (3) Total Fixation Duration.

When comparing the first fixation data across the three participant groups
(Museum Context group (MC), Aesthetic Context group (AC) and No Context group
(NC)), it possible to see an interesting trend (Fig 1) that suggests that
contextual labelling appears to change the proportion of participants fixating
on the face. The study revealed that the AC labels succeeded in disbursing the
gaze more effectively than those that are current MC labels. In all thirteen
paintings, evidence shows that participant visual behaviour changed in response
to the written interpretation. This suggests that an aesthetic context
labelling approach is more successful in stimulating and/or training the gaze
than one rooted in theological extrapolation.

[333-1]

Figure 1: Graph highlighting the proportion of viewing time spent fixating on
the face.

The pilot study also found that contextual labelling has a significant effect
on influencing levels of aesthetic appreciation, and on the ways in which
the gaze can be trained and/or manipulated to engage with areas of interest
that would otherwise be overlooked. Reorienting the content of
individual labels away from scripture and towards questions of aesthetics and
interpretation produced a statistically significant reduction in aesthetic
appreciation, which, given that the face is a key driver of
aesthetic judgements, is consistent with the finding that the aesthetic context
also reduced the participants dwell time on the face.

This paper will also discuss a how participants identify and rank the artworks
in terms of authenticity and value. By ranking compositions, we will
crossreference attitudes with the prices (all different) paid by Bishop Trevor
at auction in 1756, considering how aesthetic tastes have changed.

Summary and Conclusions

To date, studies of museum and gallery visitor behaviour primarily investigate
how people behaviourally and cognitively respond to the design and layout of
exhibits. However, they largely ignore the behavioural responses at the
‘exhibit- face’ (vom Lehn and Heath 2006) or the ‘fat moment’ (Garfinkel 1967)
of visitors’ action. Eye-tracking techniques have provided novel insights into
the unconscious viewing processes of the ‘fat moment’ of the unique collection
of Zurbaran artworks. The study highlighted statistically significant
variations in levels of aesthetic appreciation. More importantly, the
experiments indicated that by changing the written interpretation gaze can be
redirected towards areas of conceptual significance, challenging the face bias
which traditionally plays a fundamental role in aesthetic judgment.

Heidenreich, S M., & Turano, K.A. (2011). Where Does One Look When Viewing
Artwork in a Museum? Empirical Studies of the Arts, 29: 51-72.

Massaro, D., Savazzi, F., Di Dio, C., Freedberg, D., Gállese, V., Gilli, G. and
Marchetti, A., (2012). When art moves the eyes: a behavioral and eye-tracking
study. PloS one, 7(5), p.e37285.

Milekic, S. (2010). Gaze-Tracking and Museums: Current Research and
Implications. In J. Trant and D. Bearman (eds). Museums and the Web 2010:
Proceedings. Toronto: Archives & Museum Informatics.

Ro, T., Friggel, A., & Lavie, N. (2007.) Attentional biases for faces and body
parts. Vis. Cogn. 15, 322-348

Villani, D., Morgant, F., Cipresso, P., Ruggi, S., Riva, G., & Gilli, G. 
(2015). Visual exploration patterns of human figures in action: an eye tracker
study with art paintings. Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 1636

vom Lehn, D. and Heath, C. (2006). Interaction at the Exhibit-Face: Video-Based
Studies in Museums and Galleries. In H. Knoblauch et al., eds. Video
Analysis: Methodology and Methods. Qualitative Audiovisual Data Analysis in
Sociology. Frankfurt am Main: Lang.

