Tackling Innovation Networks with Smart Data: A Case Study of the
Liquid Crystal Institute at Kent State University

Hongshan Li

hli@kent.edu

Kent State University, United States of America

Marcia Zeng

mzeng@kent.edu

Kent State University, United States of America

Yin Zhang

yzhang4@kent.edu

Kent State University, United States of America

Xinyue Ye

xinyue.ye@gmail.com

Kent State University, United States of America

Tao Hu

taohu07@hotmail.com

Kent State University, United States of America

Numerous innovations and inventions have been made by human beings in the past
few millennia, providing the most important driving force for economic, social,
and cultural developments. However, for thousands of years, credits for most
of these innovations and inventions have been given to individual
genius-inventors in almost all civilizations. While the Chinese credited the
Yellow Emperor for the invention of the compass and Cai Lun for papermaking,
the British and the Americans honored James Watts and Wright Brothers for the
invention of the steam engine and aviation respectively. This genius-inventor
approach dominated the history of innovation for centuries, partly because it
was difficult, if not impossible, for both professional and amateur historians
to access or process information beyond a limited number of individuals
involved in those creative activities.

The predominant position of the genius-inventor approach has been challenged
when computers and other technologies invented in recent decades drastically
increased human capability in acquiring and processing large amounts of data.
By taking advantage of these new innovations, some scholars began to reexamine
various major innovations by expanding their scope to cover the
complex interactions between genius-inventors and their peers. With this new
approach, F. C. Moon discovered that many of those innovations were actually
the products of extensive interactions between the well-recognized geniuses and
large social networks around them. While shedding new light on many of
the innovations done in the industrial age or earlier, this new genius-centered
network paradigm still pays the most attention to the central role played by
the geniusinventors. This tendency limits the paradigm’s ability to explain the
numerous innovations and inventions made in the past century or so that did not
involve any well-recognized individual geniuses. The invention of the liquid
crystal display is one of those cases. Widely used in making TVs, computers,
stationary and mobile phones, various control panels, billboards,
watches, clocks, microwaves, and many other products that affect every aspect
of our daily lives, the liquid crystal display was invented and improved by a
large number of researchers who worked closely with their collaborators along
the way. This absence of a single “genius inventor” in the development of the
liquid crystal display and many other innovations calls for a new approach, one
that will focus squarely on the large number of researchers who formed
various networks that made those inventions possible.

This paper approaches the invention of liquid crystal display from a new
perspective. Instead of focusing on genius-inventors or
genius-inventor centered networks, this study examines all the researchers at
Liquid Crystal Institute at Kent State University (LCIKSU) as nodes in an
institutionalized network, and explores their interactions among themselves as
well as with outside collaborators. LCIKSU is chosen not only because it is the
largest research institute in the field that has made unparalleled and
sustained contributions to the invention of liquid crystal display, but also
because it has kept comprehensive institutional records since its inception,
which makes it relatively easy to trace and analyze the growth and adaptation
of this unique network of researchers.

The examination of LCIKSU is based on extensive data drawn from various
sources. The research group, whose members come from the disciplines of
Library and Information Science, History, and Geography, has been given the
access to all the available institutional records, including the LCIKSU annual
reports, grant and patent applications, conference and exchange information,
etc. All living directors of LCIKSU, incumbent as well as retired, have given
long interviews, some meeting with the group multiple times. In addition, a
large amount of data has been collected from various other sources such as
the number of LCIKSU researchers’ publications from Web of Science, their grant
awards from the National Science Foundation website, and their patent
awards from ProQuest. With the help of various available data processing tools,
usable information has been extracted from all these historical records and
turned into smart data, which is then used to accurately measure the
contributions made by LCIKSU to the invention of the liquid crystal display,
and to decipher the secret of its success as a complex network of researchers.

The careful study of the LCIKSU history reveals that the success achieved in
the invention of liquid crystal display in the past fifty years has depended on
the establishment and maintenance of a dynamic and productive network of
researchers who collaborated closely with each other both within and beyond
their own subfields or disciplines. Instead of looking for a genius inventor or
becoming one themselves, the LCIKSU directors made every effort to
recruit collaborating scientists to cover various sub-fields related with
liquid crystal research. Some of the scientists, between a handful to a dozen
over time, emerged as primary nodes in the network, producing the most paper
publications, winning the most grants, and receiving the most patents. Usually
leaders in their own subfields, these primary nodes not only worked with each
other in conducting cutting-edge research, but also built their own
sub-networks through various means and extended collaboration with
other scientists throughout the university system, across the nation, and
around the world. In order to better understand and illustrate the success of
the LCIKSU researchers, the smart data collected on their papers published,
grants received, and patents awarded is processed using various network
analysis tools so that the degree and frequency of their collaboration can
be measured and analyzed. The resulting assortativity, average clustering
coefficient, degree centrality, closeness centrality, and between centrality
indicators fully support the assessments made by individual researchers that
the concentration of a large number of scientists, especially the primary
nodes, at LCIKSU and the close collaboration among them have made it possible
for these networked scientists to produce more and better research results at
greater speed. After all, it is this sustained high level of research that has
made LCIKSU the lead inventor of the liquid crystal display.

Joseph Schumpeter, one of the best-known economists in the 20th century,
accurately observed in the early 1940s that technological progress
was increasingly becoming the business of teams of trained specialists.
However, team innovators who have played a growing role in innovation and
invention have not received adequate attention. This examination of LCIKSU not
only puts the researchers and their networks in the spotlight of the invention
of the liquid crystal display, but also introduces a new approach that sharply
focuses on the networks of scientists and extensively uses smart data.
With further development and refinement, this new network-centered and
smart-data-based approach has the potential to help narrow the existing gap in
the study of modern history of innovation.

