Establishing a “Resilient Network” for Digital Humanities

Lisa Spiro

lisamspiro@gmail.com

Rice University, United States of America

Geneva Henry

genevahenry@email.gwu.edu

George Washington University

United States of America

Toniesha Taylor

tltaylor@pvamu.edu

Prairie View A&M University, United States of America

Amanda French

alfrench@vt.edu

George Washington University

United States of America

It can be challenging to be a solo digital humanist, given the range of skills
required, deficits in training, and the need for software, hardware and
technical support. As E.E. Snyder points out, researchers may be using digital
methods but not consider themselves “digital humanists,” and thus exist outside
of virtual networks like Twitter and conferences like Digital Humanities
(2012). Even as colleges and universities recognize the potential of digital
humanities, they often struggle to support and sustain DH projects. Digital
humanities centers, like many cutting-edge, interdisciplinary academic programs
and centers, are fragile, subject to changing priorities and budget cuts 
(Sample 2010). Moreover, DH centers may not necessarily be able to support the
range of researchers’ interests and needs. In any case, many digital humanists
work at institutions without a DH center, so they often lack institutional
support and immediate colleagues whom they can learn from and with. Sample
describes the common situation of the DH scholars who lack centers: “We’ll
never be able to turn to colleagues who routinely navigate grant applications
and budget deadlines... We’ll never have an institutional advocate on campus
who can speak with a single voice to administrators, to students, to donors, to
publishers, to communities about the value of the digital humanities” (Sample
2010). The isolation among many digital humanists also means that effort is
duplicated, as, for example, faculty at multiple institutions are developing DH
educational materials similar to those being created elsewhere.

Networks provide a potential solution to isolation by linking people with
shared research interests and enabling them to exchange ideas and expertise.
Nancy Maron suggests that a campus-based network model--whether with equal
partners or “a strong central hub, like a library or a DH center, with many
spokes” -- may be a preferred organizational model for DH, as it can balance
experimentation and sustainability and combine units’ strengths (Maron 2015).
Beyond the campus, as Sample argues, researchers can build their own
communities that transcend institutions and are more agile and resilient than
formal organizations: “Stop forming committees and begin creating coalitions.
Seek affinities over affiliations, networks over institutes” (2010). Networks
can cultivate collective expertise and facilitate acting on common interests
without getting caught up in bureaucracy or being limited by long-term
obligations.

Indeed, digital humanists are participating in a range of networks, from global
to regional to university-based. Many digital humanists are connected around
the world through Twitter’s virtual network. At the country or regional
level, organizations such as Red de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD), NYCDH, and
the Texas Digital Humanities Consortium (authors Spiro and Taylor are part of
the steering committee of the TDHC) provide online platforms for researchers to
discover each other and share information, as well as organize training
and events. Within universities or university systems, digital humanities
networks such as the Oxford DH Network and the University of
Wisconsin-Madison's Digital Humanities Research Network coordinate events and
build community among local digital humanists.

As powerful as these networks are, most do not provide funding for
collaboration across institutions on research projects, nor do they organize
common work on curriculum. Enter Resilient Networks to Support Inclusive
Digital Humanities, a collaboration among George Washington University (GW),
Rice University, Davidson College, and Prairie View A&M University funded by
the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation in the spring of 2016. This network aims to
advance digital scholarship by sponsoring collaborative projects among faculty,
librarians and students and by developing openly available educational modules
that can be used to form a DH curriculum. It brings together private
research universities in Washington DC (GW) and Texas (Rice), a public
historically black university in Texas (Prairie View A&M), and a private
liberal arts college in North Carolina (Davidson College). The co PIs are a
member of the library staff and a faculty member from each institution who,
together with the project director, oversee the program through bi-weekly
online meetings and occasional face-to-face meetings. An Advisory Committee
provides strategic guidance for the project.

Between the spring of 2016 and the spring of 2018, Resilient Networks will
create:

•    A set of openly licensed, adaptable educational modules on digital
humanities that can be used in different contexts, such as workshops and
semester-long courses. Planned modules include introduction to digital
humanities, data in the humanities, the ethos of digital humanities, and
framing projects for the public, as well as electives on topics such as text
mining and database design and development.

•    Cross-institutional projects in which a faculty member, librarian and
students collaborate on digital humanities research.

To facilitate the cross-institutional projects, Resilient Networks is awarding
faculty $5000 jump start packages as seed funding; one is being granted at each
institution during year 1, and three during year 2.

•    A group of librarians, faculty, and students knowledgeable about digital
humanities methods and collaborative approaches. In August 2016, a small group
of faculty and librarians gathered at GW for a training workshop on DH project
development and humanities approaches to data facilitated by Trevor Munoz. In
addition, the Network sponsored a THATCamp at the Digital Frontiers conference
hosted at Rice in September 2016 and a THATCamp at George Washington University
in March 2017. The network will further support training by organizing
THATCamps and providing funding for members to attend intensive DH workshops.

•    Intra- and inter-institutional relationships that will facilitate ongoing
DH collaborations. Many networks depend on strong personal relationships.
Through collaborative work on research, curriculum and training, the Resilient
Networks will develop such relationships, laying the foundation for ongoing
collaborations.

There are challenges in establishing the Network that are to be expected with a
cross-institutional collaboration, including setting common goals, maintaining
strong communication, negotiating different academic calendars and
bureaucratic systems, and accomplishing tasks in the face of competing
responsibilities. In addition, the sheer diversity of digital humanities
methods makes it difficult to build a coherent community. On the
upside, however, by working within the existing institutional structures at
each university rather than creating a separate organizational unit, the work
will more likely be sustainable in the long term and better serve the needs of
the researchers at each institution. As Snyder cautions, “Decentralised
networks that lack both institutional support and dedicated time spent
in creating resources will face serious barriers; if there is no position that
has explicit responsibility for developing the network, the network may fall by
the wayside in the pressure of more urgent responsibilities” (2012). To
mitigate this risk, Resilient Networks hired a Digital Humanities Project
Director to organize program activities and manage day-to-day operations.
Establishing inter-institutional and crossinstitutional ties will leverage
already-established organizational structures rather than creating new ones. We
expect the network to scale to include more institutions, which will expand
available expertise. We will be conducting assessments to evaluate the
various aspects of the resilient network model to determine its effectiveness
in meeting our overall objectives.

In this short paper, we will discuss the network model for digital humanities
research and education, results from the first year of “Resilient Networks,”
and future plans.

