The Creative Computing Lab in Poland

Piotr Marecki

piotr.marecki@ha.art.pl

Jagiellonian University, Poland

Jakub Woynarowski

j.woynarowski@gmail.com

Academy of Fine Arts, Poland

The poster is devoted to the project we are currently working on at the
Jagiellonian University with digital media artists, programmers, and
theorists: the creative computing laboratory. The main aim of this team is to
research the creative process in its widest definition in the era of digital
textuality. Digital literature is the focus of our study, above all
highly computational literature. In the laboratory environment a team of
artists, theorists, and programmers are working on the forms of contemporary
creative programming, closely tied to the choice of programming language and
the platform on which the work is written. One of the project's aims is to
create digital artwork in the laboratory system, and to produce an academic
description of the process. The invited artists, theorists, and programmers
are gathered in three spheres of creative programming: text generators,
interactive fiction, and experiments with augmented reality. One of the outputs
of the project is a catalog and an archive of programed works, both for
research and for teaching. The team is also focusing on the phenomenon of
homegrown “writing under constraint” techniques, which are seen as precursors
to creative programing techniques. As part of our search for original and
undiscovered phenomena in the humanities, we are researching the local
demoscene as an example of creative teamwork in digital media. This project is
being carried out as a transdisciplinary task, at the crossroads of
computer studies, literary studies, creative writing, experimental literature,
and digital media. It also develops new tools in humanities research 
(laboratory teamwork) and new genres and communication practices (technical
reports, open notebook science). As part of the project we are producing
expressive processing (presupposing knowledge of the code) and platform
studies (presupposing thorough knowledge of the capabilities of the platform
where the works are written) tools for describing digital works. One of the
aims of the project is to create a retro platform archive, as well as
an archive of Polish works written for various platforms.

The poster will present the team's one year experience (the lab was launched in
May 2016). We will focus on the most important terms in the dictionary useful
for the lab's team, methods developed in collaboration between theorists,
artist and programmers working together in the academic context. Moreover, we
will build a guide on how to build such an institution in the geopolitical,
economic and cultural context, which determine the scope of our research,
approach, structure and significance of the lab. By describing our lab, we try
to tackle trends that are relevant to contemporary studies on digital
media, taking into account and affirming the local perspective, which is
different from the dominant one.

