Indigenizing the Digital Humanities: Challenges, Questions, and
Research Opportunities

Jennifer Guiliano

jenguiliano@gmail.com

Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis United States of America

Carolyn Heitman

heitman@unl.edu

University of Nebraska-Lincoln United States of America

In 2010, 2.9 million Americans self-identified as American Indian or Alaska
Native. In addition, another 2.3 million people reported as American Indian
or Alaska Native in combination with one or more other races. There are 562
federally-recognized tribes in the United States with dozens of other
state-recognized tribes awaiting federal recognition. Outside of the U.S. there
are millions of other indigenous community members in lands far-flung. Native
American Studies (on Native American Studies and its relationship to knowledge,
see Fixico, 2013; Madsen, 2012; Meyers, 2016; and Warrior, 2014), an
interdisciplinary field of study exploring the history, culture, politics,
issues, and contemporary experience of these indigenous peoples of America,
intersects with a number of issues related to access, preservation, and
methodology that are problematized through the development and deployment of
digital tools, methods and research. While tremendous work has been done around
the preservation and access of analog materials within Native

American communities (for an example of digital Native American projects, see
the Chaco Canyon Research Archive), there has been much less attention paid to
the ways in which digital objects (on analog to digital surrogates, see the 
Protocols for Native American Archival Materials; on digital repatriation,
see Christen, 2011; Colwell-Chanthaphonh, 2011; Colwell, 2015; and Runde,
2010), practices, and methods function within Native communities and through
Native American Studies scholarship. With the exception of the Murkutu content
management system which originated with the Warumungu Aboriginal community
in the Central Australian town of Tennant Creek, digital

humanities researchers and developers have been

largely separate from Native American Studies- for example, it is only in the
last year or so that we have begun to see digital humanities represented at
Native American Studies conferences (e.g. Ethnohistory, Native American and
Indigenous Studies Association, etc.) or within topical sub-panels at
professional gatherings like the American Studies Association, the Modern
Language Association, or the American Historical Association. There are
hundreds of scholars actively working at dozens of American Indian, Native
American, and Indigenous studies programs in addition to scholars working in
humanities departments like literature, history, anthropology, archeology, etc.
While museum, library, and archival communities have digitized Native cultural
objects, literature, and music, there has been just cursory use of these
materials within the larger digital humanities research landscape outside of
digital archives or digital anthropol-ogy/archeology contexts. This submission
opens by exploring a handful of individual projects that have leveraged Native
materials to highlight how Native American studies scholars might critique the
use and contextualization of tribal materials. Potential projects for
exploration include Performing Archive: Edward Curtis + “the vanishing race” ,
the Indigenous Digital Archive, and the Native American Images Project.
The digital humanities community has done little to inform itself of the unique
issues associated with research and teaching by and in the Native American
context. This knowledge has not been integrated for five reasons: 1) funding
for Native American studies research institutionally has focused on the
production of traditional scholarly products (e.g. monographs); 2) Native
American studies as a discipline has remained underfunded institutionally which
bars many institutions from hiring staff, faculty, and tribal members to work
together to teach and research; 3) funding for cultural heritage organizations
including tribal archives, libraries, and museums, has focused on preservation
and access to analog materials (on intellectual property issues associated with
analog to digital Native materials, see Anderson, 2005; and Brown and Nicholas,
2012) only, rather than embracing the spectrum of digital and analog materials
that document Native life; 4) the diversity of academic disciplines who
participate in Native Studies is broad and, as such, lends itself to
fragmentation and a lack of information exchange about digital projects, tools,
methods, and pedagogy; and 5) Digital

Native studies most frequently is only encountered by scholars and community
members at the end of the development cycle as the project is released and
they begin to encounter “actual” users. As a result, there do not exist any
best practices, guidelines, or even suggestions about the process of working in
digital environments with Native American communities. Archaeologists and
museum professionals have made the furthest strides in attempting to address
engagement with tribal communities and research (on issues of information
architecture and archiving in indigenous contexts, see Powell and Aiken, 2010;
Cushman, 2013; Senier, 2014; Christen, 2012; and Joffrion and Fernández, 2015),
yet that work has not widely proliferated among the interdisciplinary
humanities nor the digital humanities more generally. As a result, each digital
humanist (and humanist) must start from scratch and negotiate every encounter
without guidance or lessons learned from those who have attempted integration
of the digital with Native American Studies before.

Additionally, because these conversations have

been focused mainly on individual projects or on

knowledge management generally (e.g. the Murkutu Project and the Intellectual
Property Issues in Cultural Heritage Protocol), the cross-pollination of an
interdisciplinary community of digital researchers with tribal communities,
cultural heritage organizations, and academic scholars has been significantly
underdeveloped. Thus, it is not surprising that there are only a handful of
funded digital projects documenting Native American life: the American Indian
Treaties Portal, a digital collection of the final texts of 366 of the
375 American Indian treaties recognized by the United States Department of
State, and the digitized Journals of Lewis & Clark Expedition created in
partnership with the Center for Digital Research at the University of Nebraska
Lincoln. Mark of the Mississippians: A Multi-Platform Digital Media Project
(Cahokia Mounds Museum Society) and Meeting the Earthworks Builders, a
flashbased video game are currently being developed by the Ohio State
University.. Additionally, NEH Public Programs just funded Indians of the
Midwest, an educational website focused on recent scholarship on Native peoples
and the Newberry Library Collection.

The barriers to digital fluency in Native American studies are varied and
include such obstacles as cultural rules regarding access to sensitive
materials, the advanced technical expertise that software and hardware often
requires beyond basic digitization, the costs of digital infrastructure and
proprietary license fees, and issues of community engagement and trust that
might limit the display of digital materials about Native peoples. It might be
tempting to assume that the uptake of digital humanities method and pedagogy in
the academic, cultural heritage, and tribal communities is one of lack of
information or funding, but in fact the digital humanities researchers included
as part of the Digital Native American and Indigenous Studies project are
finding that it is also the cultural barriers to access, display, and analysis
across differing types of digital materials that are challenging our ability to
leverage digital tools, resources, and approaches.

Digital Humanities articulates three parallel interdisciplinary commitments to
“openness”: 1) a commitment to open access publishing; 2) a commitment to open
access/open source software development; and 3) a commitment to open access
data. While the first two trends have received deep and lasting attention via
scholarly publishing and digital commons enterprises and the open source
development movement promoted by github and other code repositories,
the commitment to open access data has been largely undertheorized. Using case
studies of Digital Humanities projects that have been developed using Native
American and Indigenous content, this submission suggests that Native and
Indigenous content complicates the current technical application of open source
development driven by digital aggregators and application programming interface
development. By highlighting ethical issues around the use, reuse, and
distributed architectures encouraged by common digital humanities technologies,
this submission suggests that the rhetoric and practice of the open access data
movement obscures both Native agency in determining the use of community
materials as well as the role of technical determinism in proliferating the
violence of colonial archives on Native communities. Questions this submission
engages with include: How do we deal with born-digital research data in Native
American and Indigenous contexts? How do we as scholars responsibly engage in
digital research in Native communities? How do organizations and institutions
navigate the cultural, legal, and ethical contexts of the communities whose
objects they hold? How can free and open source software solutions be leveraged
to build community engagement? Finally, what might be recommended for tribal
communities who desire to launch their own digital projects but may have
concerns about resources, access, infrastructure, and preservation?

