Neoclassica - an open framework for research in Neoclassicism

Simon Donig

simon.donig@uni-passau.de

University of Passau, Germany

Maria Christoforaki

maria.christoforaki@uni-passau.de

University of Passau, Germany

Siegfried Handschuh

siegfried.handschuh@uni-passau.de

University of Passau, Germany

Bernhard Bermeitinger

bernhard.bermeitinger@uni-passau.de University of Passau, Germany

In the History of Art, the shaping of aesthetic forms, the transfer of the
stylistic languagem and the change of styles have always been at the heart of
the discipline. The co-occurrence of aesthetic forms in multiple modi (such as
architecture, applied arts, graphics and textual description) or in larger
bodies of artefacts has been researched to a lesser degree. Instruments
and methods from the field of the Digital Humanities are now opening up
pathways for a new understanding of such issues by supporting hermeneutic
understanding with quantitative means.

Such instruments are particularly valuable for researching far reaching
aesthetic movements such as Neoclassicism (ca. 1760-1860). The
Neoclassic movement was of almost global scale - affecting architecture and
design from Sidney to New York, and from Athens to the outreach of the Russian
Urals -while relating to a common reference in Classical Antiquity, therefore
making it an almost ideal topic for studying processes of stylistic
transformation.

Here, we present the Neoclassica research framework (The Neoclassica Project,
2017), aimed at providing historians and art historians with new instruments
and methods for analysing and classifying material artefacts and aesthetic
forms. Initially we are focusing on works of applied art (for instance
furniture and furnishings) as well as architecture, following the preliminary
hypotheses that these modi show aesthetic forms in close communication with
one another due to constructional commonalities and their shared reference of
the Classical. While these forms show a trove of similarities across a huge
geographic range they also diverge due to local traditions, needs and
limitations or political conditions supporting the use of particular
vocabularies of aesthetic forms.

We consider it most promising to follow these trajectories in a fresh way,
applying the instruments provided by the Neoclassica system, joining a top-down
approach harnessing the domain expert knowledge and a data-driven bottom-up
approach exploiting the powers of computationally processing large amounts of
data.

Specifically, the top down approach comprises a formalized
knowledge-representation based on a newly developed ontology for classical
artefacts and the semantic annotation and curation of a specifically developed
corpus of images and texts done by experts.

The Neoclassica ontology aims to establish a controlled vocabulary that will be
both research oriented and multilingual, while at the same time taking into
account the different shape of the represented concepts in different
languages, specifically in English, French and German (Donig, Christoforaki &
Handschuh, 2016). The concepts and terms used to describe artefacts and their
structure are based on period sources such as such as for instance Charles
Percier’s and Pierre François Leonard Fontaine's or Thomas Sheraton’s
pattern-books or George Hepplewithe’s treatise on interior decoration 
(Hepplewhite, 1794; Sheraton, 1802, 1803; Percier, 1812) reflecting the
conceptual control over the production of artefacts.

Since January we started the development of a semantic annotation tool for
image corpora. The initial corpus sources will be commercial providers
like Auction Houses but we also strive to include coherent ensembles. For this
we have for instance a partnership for digitizing the interiors and furnishings
of the Dessau-Worlitz UNESCO World Heritage Site. The digitization and
annotation will be done in collaboration with the chair for Visual Studies and
Art History of our University. We conceptualize the process of corpus
annotation to be in a constant dialog with the ontology development, so that
the findings of domain experts curating the data will enrich the perception for
the overall domain.

The bottom-up approach, on the other hand, is data-driven in the sense that it
employs Deep Learning and Distributed Semantics algorithms for
knowledge extraction and classification from images and text corpora
(Bermeitinger, Donig, Christoforaki, et al., 2017). We apply a Deep Learning
algorithm for classifying features in digital images of classical artefacts
like furniture, works of applied art and architecture. We tested the algorithm
in a trial image corpus with coarse label annotation for the image as a whole
(The corpus and accompanying source code can be downloaded from The Neoclassica
Project, 2017). Currently we are slowly progressing to a more refined feature
annotation trained on a corpus annotated by experts using the ontology.

Knowledge discovery in text corpora is divided into

Named Entity and Relationship extraction mechanisms, already robust in English
and rapidly evolving in the German language. This is complemented with a schema
agnostic natural language query interface. These modules are part of the
in-house developed open source system StarGraph (Lambda3 Project, 2017) capable
of processing both structured and unstructured data.

We aspire for the Neoclassica framework to become the centre of a sustainable,
open community of scholars with a multitude of disciplinary backgrounds from
both the humanities and computer sciences, making it an amalgam system that
combines the best of two worlds.

Notes

The project team may be contacted at neoclassica@fim.uni-passau.de .

