Go Queer

Maureen Engel

mengel@ualberta.ca University of Alberta, Canada

Bamdad Aghilidehkordi

aghilide@ualberta.ca University of Alberta, Canada

Kaitlyn Clafin

ekaitlyn@ualberta.ca University of Alberta, Canada

Michaela Stang

mmstang@ualberta.ca University of Alberta, Canada

Nailisa Tanner

nailisa@ualberta.ca University of Alberta, Canada

This poster presents the work completed to date on

Go Queer, a ludic, locative media experiment and experience that occurs on
location, in the city, on the playful border between game and story, the
present and the past, the queer and the straight, the normative and the slant.
The app takes the city of Edmonton's queer history as its text, and produces a
locative, spatialized narrative of that history by displaying text,
images, video and audio in place at the actual locations where they occurred,
thus creating what Richardson and Hjorth (2014, 256) and call “the hybrid
experience of place and presence.” The app invites its users to drift queerly
through the city, discovering the hidden histories that always surround us, yet
somehow remain just beyond our apprehension. The app compiles these traces into
a media layer that augments quotidian city space, juxtaposing the past onto the
present, creating a deep, queer narrative of place. By bringing together the
physical navigation of the contemporary city with the imaginative navigation of
its queer past, the app enacts a praxis that we characterize as a queer
ludic traversal, one that renders the navigation itself as queer as the content
that it presents. In so doing, the app produces the experience of place, in
Lucy Lip-pard's (1997) formulation that

Place is latitudinal and longitudinal within the map of a person's life. It is
temporal and spatial, personal and political. A layered location replete with
human histories and memories, place has width as well as depth. It is
about connections, what surrounds it, what formed it, what happened there, what
will happen there.

(7)

This poster highlights four foundational questions

of Go Queer that serve as base from which we research, write, and build:

Why a “game” for queer history?

Games have the unique affordance of putting play-ers/readers into a
first-person relationship with content, where they expect to actively interact
with, and manipulate it. Go Queer seeks to generate the affective experience of
queerness, to show and not just tell the queer history of the city, to collapse
the distance between the present and the past. The game proceeds according to a
procedural rhetoric that argues, in Sarah Ahmed's words (2006, 563), that
“queers are differently ‘oriented' to a spatial world that is the product of
extended and extensive heteronormativity.”

How can we encode a queer sense of place and co-presence in the contemporary
city?

Thinking through the implications of “orientation” makes locative media a
logical choice of format. It allows us to create a mimetic experience, where
the player experiences the juxtaposition of queer space/time simultaneously
with contemporary, normative space/time. The result of this juxtaposition
is, we argue, a particularly powerful form of affect, where the player/user
experiences the paradox of queer space: that it is always simultaneously both
queer and not queer, slant and straight, persistent and fleeting.

How can we integrate    crowd-sourced

materials effectively and ethically?

Queer places are, by definition, sites of accretion, where stories, memories,
and experiences are gathered. Queer place, in particular, is reliant on
ephemeral histories, personal moments and memories. That Go Queer must
integrate these personal archives is apparent, yet we must also be diligent
about our ethical relationship to the material. How can we ethically solicit,
verify, and evaluate community contributions to our history?

What technological structures will facilitate our goals?

The project requires both flexibility and stability. In order to offer the
greatest flexibility to the interface, but the most stability to the actual
content, we have decided on a custom server wrapped around a core GIS server.
The GIS server will host the stable database; the custom wrapper will allow the
flexibility to: a) customize and change the behaviour of the app as needed
without modifying the underlying data structure; and b) input the primary
materials into the database via a simple form-based interface.

We expect to have a functional beta version in place by DH 2017. A final
production version should be launched in summer 2018.

