Digital Annotation for Social and Collaborative Learning in the Humanities
Classroom

Brian Charles Johnsrud

johnsrud@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

Daniel Marle Bush

dabush@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

Michael Widner

mikewidner@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

Reading, writing, and discussion are the most common—and, most would agree, the
most valuable—components of a university-level humanities seminar. In
humanities courses, all three activities can be guided and supported with a
variety of digital and analog tools. Digital texts can create novel
opportunities for teaching and learning, particularly when students’ reading
activity is made visible to other members of the course. In this short paper,
we will introduce Lacuna, a web-based platform which hosts digital course
materials to be read and annotated socially and collaboratively. We report
these findings in relation to an observational case study of four different
humanities courses at California community colleges using Lacuna.

Lacuna is the result of a collaborative and iterative effort at Stanford to
design a platform that supports the practices of critical reading and dialogue
in humanities courses. On Lacuna, which uses Drupal to manage content, course
syllabus materials are digitized and uploaded to the platform. These materials
can be organized by topic, class date, and other metadata such as medium (text,
video, or audio). When students and instructors open up materials, they can
digitally annotate selections from any text using a pop-up javascript
annotator.

Annotation on Lacuna is a social as well as an individual practice, leveraging
the participatory possibilities of web-based technologies. Lacuna users can
choose to share annotations with one another and hover over highlighted
passages to reveal others’ comments or questions. Social annotation
makes explicit and visible for students the broad array of annotation practices
within an interpretive community such as a classroom and helps students
cocreate interpretations of texts. Students’ annotation activity on Lacuna is
also made visible through a separate instructor dashboard, which
helps instructors track engagement throughout the course. Finally, annotations
can be connected across texts using the “Sewing Kit” in order to support
intertextual analyses.

After introducing the features of the platform, we present a case study of the
use of Lacuna in four California community-college classes. As part of a
U.S. Department of Education Title VI grant, we worked with faculty from
Foothill College, De Anza College, and College of San Mateo to incorporate
Lacuna into their lesson plans and classroom pedagogy. Drawing on ethnographic
methods, we describe how the faculty members used the platform’s affordances to
integrate students’ online activity into course planning and seminar
discussions and activities. We also explore students’ experience of social
annotation and social reading, insights gathered from surveys, interviews, and
classroom observation.

In our case study, we find that student annotations and writing on Lacuna give
instructors more insight into students’ perspectives on texts and
course materials. The visibility of shared annotations encourages students to
take on a more active role as peer instructors and peer learners. Our short
talk will close with a discussion of the new responsibilities, workflows, and
demands on self-reflection introduced by these altered relationships between
course participants. People at our talk will learn about the benefits and
challenges encountered in using Lacuna, which are likely to be shared by
individuals using other learning technologies with similar goals and features.
We will also consider future directions for the enhancement of teaching and
learning through the use of social reading and digital annotation.

