Reconstructing Readerly Attention: Citational Practices and the
Canon, 1789-2016

Mark Algee-Hewitt

mark.algee-hewitt@stanford.edu Stanford University, United States of America

David McClure

dclure@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

Hannah Walser

walser@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

In its ability to extract feature sets, relate texts within an abstract space,
and semantically parse groups of texts, computational textual analysis
has functioned primarily as a formalist intervention into literary study. When
practitioners venture outside of the formal features of the texts themselves,
it is author or date that serves as the point of contact between the text and
its wider context. And yet, texts offer a rich history of reception: as
different interpretive communities (Fish 1980) receive and reinterpret novels,
poems or plays, they recontextualize the literary object to suit the particular
socio-cultural goals of their period or nationality. Lacking detailed accounts
of reading practices at large scales, even traditional practitioners of
literary history have been unable to reconstruct the history of reception of
even the most historically canonical texts. In this project, we leverage
the ability of Digital Humanities to recover, at least provisionally, a
large-scale history of textual reception by exploring the patterns of citation
that reveal the attention paid to specific texts across their history as
read-erly objects. How are certain canonical texts cited over time and what can
the attention paid to different segments of texts with a rich reception history
tell us about the reading or social practices of different historical periods?
How do different groups of readers (particularly authors and critics) quote
text differently as they make use of passages in their own writing? And how do
specialists and non-specialists cite the same text differently? By exploring
the locus of attention within a canonical text, both across groups of
readers and across history, we provisionally reconstruct a historically and
socially contingent map of a text's reception history.

As Piper and Algee-Hewitt have argued in “The Werther Effect” (Piper and
Algee-Hewitt 2014), practices of citation, the embedding of the language of
a text within other works, can reveal patterns of reception even within a
single author's corpus. In this project, we expand this approach
multi-dimensionally, identifying passages of canonical works quoted in other
novels, in critical articles by specialists and nonfield specialists, and in a
larger undifferentiated corpus of text. The scale of our analysis enables us to
identify what parts of a text have received the most writerly attention overall
and how that attention has been shaped over time. By moving from semantics to
passages, we switch our attention from the intangible metrics of semantic
similarity, to specific, quotation-level instances of citation that demonstrate
specific attention to identifiable parts of our target texts. Drawing on work
in sequence alignment by David Smith et al (2013) and Richard So et al.
(forthcoming), we will therefore be able to explore patterns of attention that
have been paid to a text by identifiable groups of readers. We argue that these
patterns of citational-ity serve as a proxy for the reception of a text:
while necessarily limited to readers who themselves were authors (or critics),
they nevertheless represent an important category of reception available to
analysis.

To extract the quotations, we used Python's “dif-flib” module, wrapped up as a
parallelized MPI program that runs on an HPC cluster. To compare any two
individual texts - for example, when checking for passages from Hamlet inside
of a novel from the Gale American Fiction corpus - the texts are first split
into tokens and passed through a filter that removes a set of 200 stopwords.
This speeds up the alignment algorithm (the high-frequency words that get
pulled out make up a significant portion of the total words in any given text,
producing shorter sequences) and also has the advantage of making the alignment
process less sensitive to small changes in function words, which seem to get
shuffled around or changed fairly frequently when a text is quoted. For
example, a change from:

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

Where thrift may follow fawning

to

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

That thrift may follow fawning

still gets picked up as a quotation, since the semantically significant words -
crook, pregnant, hinges, knee, thrift, fawning - stay the same.

These filtered sequences of tokens then get passed

through the alignment algorithm, which produces a set of matches, recoded in
terms of their starting positions in each text and the length of the matching
subsequence. To ensure that the matches represent actual quotations, we
discarded matches shorter than 5 tokens (not counting stopwords), since
alignments shorter than this include a fair number of false positives, generic
word sequences that likely don't represent any kind of meaningful quotation or
intertextual-ity - for example, many are numbers, things like "five hundred
thousand." This gives us high "precision" - almost all of the alignments that
are included in the final analysis represent legitimate quotations to the play
-but it also drops down the "recall" somewhat, since some of the shorter
alignments are, in fact, real quotes - things like "weighing delight and dole."
We are currently evaluating a couple of strategies for identifying these
alignments that are short but semantically "focused" enough that we can say
with confidence that they should be included in the set of valid matches.

We use this method of sequence alignment to trace the quotations of five
canonical texts with a rich citation history across four corpora. Our selected
texts include Shakespeare's Hamlet, Milton's Paradise Lost, Dickens' A
Christmas Carol, Caroll's Alice in Wonderland and Wordsworth's Prelude. Not
only are all of these texts heavily quoted by critics, but, we argue, they have
entered the literary and cultural consciousness of both Britain and America
such that the passages that are cited by authors and critics reveal
interpretive and readerly practices both across time and between different
groups. For each text, we extract all of the citations from it that are five
words (excluding stopwords) or longer, that occur in each of our four corpora:
the full-text Hathi trust corpus, representing a massive sample of writing in
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries; a literature-specific corpus of
28,000 novels from England and America dating from 1789-2016; and two corpora
of articles on literary studies, one a corpus of 10 journals of literary
criticism and history (e.g. PMLA, NLH, Critical Inquiry) and one a corpus of 10
field-specific journals focused specifically on the authors represented in our
group of

canonical texts (e.g. Shakespeare Quarterly, Milton

Studies, Wordsworth Circle).

Between these four corpora, we are able to differentiate the kind of attention
paid to our primary canonical texts by four different groups of readers. Do
novelists pay attention to different parts of a text than authors in general in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries? Do general literary critics quote
different parts of Hamlet than Shakespeare specialists? And for each of these
corpora, how does the citation map of each of our texts change over time?

For example, a citation map of Hamlet in our novel corpus revealed 1,693
quotations of five or more non-stopword tokens, which collectively cover about
25% of all words in the play. When we plot the frequency of citations across
the narrative of the drama (broken into 500 bins), our method reveals the
passages most quoted by novelists of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
(Figure 1). From this citation map, we can see that Hamlet's soliloquy (“to be
or not to be”) is among the top three passages cited by novelists; however, the
quotation that clearly dominates the use of Hamlet by this group of readers
comes from Act 5, Scene 2 “There's a divinity that shapes our ends, / Rough-hew
them how we will.—“

[416-1]

twentieth-century novels. Each passage is 1/500 of the text.

Although not among the most identifiable passages today, this quotation clearly
had a resonance for the readers of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries.

By comparing this map of citations across the narrative of Shakespeare's plays
to ones that are both drawn from our comparative corpora and periodized across
the two centuries they represent, we are able to show how different passages
gain and lose meaning across time and between kinds of reading. As we expand
this to all five of our canonical texts read into all four of our corpora, we
can shed light on how historically and disciplinarily specific practices of
reading shaped the horizons of interpretation for specific works, and begin to
reconstruct these reader-based practices in ways that are open and tractable to
the Digital Humanities.

