Beyond Access: Critical Catalog Constructions

Molly Hardy

mhardy@mwa.org

American Antiquarian Society, United States of America

Dawn Childress

dchildress@library.ucla.edu

UC Los Angeles, United States of America

Paige Morgan

paige.c.morgan@gmail.com

University of Miami, United States of America

This panel explores the use of digital, rare book catalogs as platforms for
collaboration and as sources of data to uncover patterns of book production and
to offer new insights into the sociology of texts. Extractions from and
additions to bibliographic data extend the catalog beyond its original use as a
point of access and discovery. The use of catalogs as sources of bibliographic
big data as well as the use of platforms that enable bibliographic record
annotation allow us to reimagine the catalog’s trajectories of creation
and utility. Considering the genealogy of the catalog, the panel will examine
how research practices have both informed and been informed by catalogs since
their inception and how the work of bibliography is reimagined in the catalog.
Focusing on how limitations and aporia in the catalog can lead to critical
making in the digital age, the panel will show how digital uses of the catalog
currently enable mindful interrogation of catalog data and catalog making as
well as consider possibilities for expanded use of rare book catalog data in
the future. This consideration of the rare book catalog as a digital humanities
project invites reassessment of legacy information architecture as well as the
many hands that built the bibliographic structures on which so much of the work
of the digital humanities rests.

In “Towards Speculative Catalogs,” Dawn Childress will open with a discussion
of the transformative promise of the digital as we reconstruct catalogs in new
forms and formats. To provide context for critical catalog constructions more
broadly, Childress will highlight how bibliographies and catalogs have
served as source material for research beyond that of points of access in both
pre- and post-DH contexts, as well as consider how digital humanities use cases
might differ from more analog approaches, whether qualitative or quantitative.
In addressing these questions, Childress will explore the promise of applying
current and emerging tools and standards (such as linked data, IIIF, PCDM,
etc.) to the practice of interrogating bibliographic and catalog data.
Childress will suggest how we might leverage these systems to record
and analyze lacunae, erasures, and bias in capturing the bibliographic record
and, drawing on Bethany Nowviskie’s notion of speculative collections,
how these systems might support active reframing and interrogation by users.

In “‘The Technology of Shared Cataloging’: A Retrospective,” Molly O’Hagan
Hardy will build on Childress’s remarks through a close look at the creation
and re-creation of two rare book union catalogs: the English Short Title
Catalog (ESTC) and the North American Imprints Program (NAIP). In 1981, in a
Bibliographic Society of America Symposium from which the title of Hardy’s
paper takes its name, William Todd wrote, “Perhaps we do not yet fully
appreciate the situation, now rapidly materializing, whereby computers converse
with each other in any mode, while the rest of us, mere mortals, stand mute
before them.” Remarks like this, which abound in the excitement and trepidation
expressed during the emergence of these rare book union catalogs, echo a
similar exuberance and hesitancy around the transformation from MARC to linked
data models. Examining what “machine readable” meant then and means now, Hardy
will draw parallels between the current conversation around BIBFRAME and other
such initiatives and those early efforts led by Robin Alston and Marcus
McCorison to amass large amounts of special collections’ catalog data. She
will then examine what it was these catalogs set out to capture and in what
ways this work is being reimagined in the linked open data environment.
She will do this through a close look at the American Antiquarian Society’s
Printers’ File linked data project and its reliance on LCNAF and VIAF to merge
MARC data with BIBFRAME. Ultimately, she will consider how such initiatives
necessitate the reimagining of library and scholarly work, so those working on
both sides of the reference desk are not left to “stand mute” before their
creations. Hardy will point to examples of innovative uses of rare book catalog
data for digital humanities projects. Such uses, Hardy will show, not only
prove efficient and effective means of generating data, but they also
productively unearth biases inherent in any information system.

Paige Morgan will conclude our presentations with “Searching For Common Ground:
Modeling Bibliographic Data in Library and DH Contexts,” in which she will
present the results of a survey of data use in DH projects examining the
projects’ use and presentation of library data (including bibliographic data
and data presented in digital collections platforms). This survey will focus on

•    whether each project includes bibliographic references;

•    how much granular detail any bibliographic references include,

•    whether or not such data is presented in the format of a specific model,
and

•    the presence or absence of links to specific copies, whether in library or
digital archive catalogs (such as HathiTrust, the ESTC, paywalled collections
(ECCO, EEBO, etc.), or websites like Google Books and Project Gutenberg).

Gathering this data will allow Morgan to look for common priorities in the
project creators’ use of library data; and to identify some of the
assumptions that digital humanities has made about libraries and the
bibliographic information that they produce. She will use the DH project survey
data as the basis for a comparison with bibliographic ontologies (such
as FRBRoo, BIBFRAME, Schema.org, and BIBO), and literature on challenges and
best practices in bibliographic data modeling. Morgan will look
for intersections, missed connections, and opportunities between digital
humanities and cataloging work; and will consider how assumptions made in
digital humanities elide the complexity and ongoing negotiations in the
production of bibliographic data. In these projects, what drives the decisions
to model (or not model) bibliographic data? How do the priorities of DH
practitioners differ from those of library-based data creators? The increasing
development of off-the-shelf tools, and the gradual growth of
infrastructure for learning digital humanities skills and accessing data means
that in many ways, it is possible for DHers, both new and experienced, to do
more than before. However, increased access to materials and resources does not
mean that the efforts of DH and library data communities will automatically
complement each other. In FRBR, Before & After, Karen Coyle observes that
library personnel working with data "have made little change in our approach to
subject analysis in the last half-century, possibly because there isn't a
clear direction for improving this aspect of our work." This paper will argue
that similar ambiguities exist around the use of bibliographic data in DH
projects, and that the apparent common ground of bibliographic data use is more
complex than it appears.

