VisColl: Modeling and visualizing the physical structure of
medieval manuscripts, a poster and demonstration

Dot Porter

dot.porter@gmail.com

University of Pennsylvania Libraries

United States of America

Alexandra Gillespie

alexandra.gillespie@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

Alberto Campagnolo

alberto.campagnolo@gmail.com

Library of Congress, United States of America

Laura Mitchell

laura.mitchell@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

Rachel Di Cresce

rachel.dicresce@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

VisColl is a data model and associated tools that are designed to help scholars
to visualize the physical collation of medieval manuscripts. In
manuscript descriptions and library catalogs, a collation is normally given in
the form of a formula, which describes each quire in terms of the position of
that quire in the manuscript, how many leaves the quire contains, and if any
leaves have been added or removed. A diagram may also be used to illustrate
the same information, with the added benefit of clearly showing which leaves
are conjoined (conjoined leaves are also known as bifolia). VisColl enables
scholars to model the collation of manuscripts and then to present that
information in various ways, including diagrams and formulas, but also in novel
ways distinct from collating a manuscript by hand. For instance, in addition to
visualizing the physical structure of a manuscript, the Beta Version of the
VisColl data model currently under development enables users to
create taxonomies describing the content of the manuscript, and other elements,
which will enable tools to link those taxonomies to the physical structure,
producing a more robust and descriptive visualization than is possible in the
current system.

VisColl was conceived in the mid-2000s by Dot Porter during her work at the
Collaboratory for Research in Computing for Humanities at the University of
Kentucky (UKY). Porter developed the tool in order to address issues she
encountered in effectively visualizing standard descriptions of manuscripts in
scholarly works. For instance, in Beowulf and the Beowulf Manuscript Kevin
Kiernan uses the physical construction of the manuscript to make arguments
about the dating of the text (separate from the dating of the manuscript
itself). In addition, Ben Withers (of UKY), in The Illustrated Old
English Hexateuch, Cotton MS. Claudius B.IV: the Frontier of Seeing and Reading
in Anglo-Saxon England, similarly used a detailed collation statement of the
manuscript as the backbone for his investigation of the construction of the
manuscript. There are numerous examples of scholarly works that build an
argument about the dating and construction of manuscripts based on the
collation of the physical object. In consulting such works, Porter saw an
opportunity to enable readers to better visualize the structure of the object
beyond the limitations of traditional formulas, diagrams, and collation
statements.

Digitized medieval manuscripts are typically viewed through page-turning
interfaces, which give the impression of page openings, but lack the
physical cues present in a physical book, i.e., the size of the book, its
thickness, details of the parchment or paper, etc. Indeed, page-turning
interfaces do not usually show a picture of book openings at all, but rather
they are composites made with two images: one of the leftside page and another
of the right-side page. These images would have been taken at different
times. Typically all images of one side pages are taken first, e.g. all the
rectos, then of the other side, and then file names or structural metadata are
used to order the files correctly in post processing. Most digital
libraries provide some information on the pages depicted, and views other than
single pages: all provide information on the folio number and the side (recto
or verso) shown; some indicate the quire number, and some offer a variety of
viewing modes, such as single pages, double pages, pages of thumbnails or
thumbnails presented filmstrip-style across the bottom of a page. However,
again, for the most part, the focus of these resources is on the page, rather
than on the physical object. Even the Turning the Pages™ software, conceived by
the British Library in 1996 (and developed by Amarillo Systems since 2001),
which, since version 2.0 (2006), has produced realistic threedimensional books
(including the ability to mimic the different movement of paper and parchment
pages as these are turned), lacks any modelling of the gathering structure. To
present knowledge, there is no institutional digital library that describes
the physicality of manuscripts outside of the standard Physical Description
section of the manuscript records and collation formulas.

Porter, D. (2016). VisColl. University of Pennsylvania, 23 Oct. 2016. Web. 07
Apr. 2017. <https://github.com/le-oba/VisColl>.

University of Toronto Libraries. (n.d.) University of Toronto. <https://
github.com/utlib>

The Alpha Version of the VisColl data model is implemented in the Collation
Modeler and the Collation Visualizer hosted at the University of Pennsylvania,
but the data model was envisioned as agnostic and was designed to be easily
used by other collation tools. The University of Toronto, through
a Mellon-funded project entitled Digital Tools for Manuscript Study, is
developing a robust VisColl web application which implements the Beta Version
of the data model, and allows users to visually manipulate and present diagrams
and metadata in real time, while also making use of the International
Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) to integrate digital manuscript images
alongside scholarly work.

This poster will document the stages of the development of VisColl, from its
conception to its current instantiation, highlighting the steps taken and the
reasoning behind each new actualization of the project, and will also serve as
a demonstration of the current version of the tool developed by the
University of Toronto Libraries. Documentation and code of this version can be
found and downloaded from the University of Toronto Libraries’ GitHub page.
The current state of development can be found at VisColl's GitHub page, which
documents each new build, and from which the project's code can be downloaded.

