Playing with Time

Jeri Wieringa

jwiering@gmu.edu

George Mason University, United States of America

The question of change over time is central for historians as they trace the
contours of people, communities, organizations, and states. But computationally
tracing changes in discourse over time is not a straightforward process with
our current algorithmic tools and methods. While charting topics over time can
give a general picture of the prevalence of ideas or discourses at various
points, Benjamin Schmidt and others have raised concerns regarding the ways
existing tools and methods model change over time. Most text-mining algorithms
assume that time is linear and progressive, is experienced as such, and that
the data is generally consistent over time. As Schmidt notes, even models such
as Topics over Time, which was developed to account for shifts in language, are
problematic because of the assumptions they make regarding how language changes
(Schmidt 2012, see also Underwood, 2012, and Nowviskie, 2016).

If we allow that time is relative and that the experience of time shapes the
ways a community and its discourses develop, we are faced with the challenge of
how to incorporate varied experiences of time into our computational models.
This poster will present my preliminary results applying various
periodization schemes to track the development of Seventh-day Adventist
discourses around salvation and health over the first 70 years of the
denomination's existence.

Seventh-day Adventism is an apocalyptic and millennialist belief system, in
that followers anticipate the imminent return of Jesus Christ and
the corresponding end of the world. Born out of William Miller’s teaching that
1843 (later 1844) would be the date of Christ’s return, early Seventh-day
Adventists reinterpreted the date in the wake of the Great Disappointment (the
period after October 22, 1844, the date the Millerites believed Jesus would
return. to signify the start of a new, final, and assumedly short phase in the
work of salvation). They also adopted Sabbatarianism, holding Saturday, rather
than Sunday, as the proper day for Christian observance. As such, early
adherents operated within a changing temporal imaginary, organizing their weeks
and years in contrast to their religious neighbors and anticipating, with
varying degrees of urgency at different points in their history, the second
coming.

The changing constructions of time within Seventh-day Adventism provide an
instructive case study for examining how alternative structures and
experiences of time might be modeled computationally. With a corpus of
approximately 13,000 periodical issues split into nearly 200,000 pages, I am
using Latent Dirichlet Allocation as implemented in Gensim to cluster the pages
according to five different periodization schemes: no periodization (the whole
corpus, spanning 70 years); periodization by decade (the corpus split by decade
increments); cumulative periodization by decade (the corpus split by
decade increments, but with each subsequent period added to the previous -
i.e., 1844-1850, 1844-1860, 1844-1870, etc.); historical periodization (the
corpus split according to “crisis” points in the denomination’s history);
cumulative historical periodization (the corpus split according to the
historical periodization scheme above but with each subsequent period added to
the previous).

Comparing these different schemes will enable me to explore whether and how
periodization influences which discursive patterns I am able to
surface computationally. To compare between the resulting models, I will
evaluate on the following aspects: how well the documents are described by the
topic labels assigned; the coherence of the topics, both internally and in
relation to each other; and the visibility of change and development of topics
over time.

My hypothesis is that the cumulative historical periodization will provide the
richest picture of the shifts in the community’s discourse. I anticipate
that this will be visible through the percentage of documents labelled as
relating to different topics, the appearance of new related topics over time,
and different topic compositions at different points in time. However, I may
conclude that the different periodization schemes provide little
additional information. I propose that a negative conclusion is also important
for the field and either result will provide productive information for
developing computational methods that address the complexities that are at the
heart of the humanities.

