Mapping Borges in the Argentine Publishing Industry (1930-1951)

Nora C. Benedict

ncb3ka@virginia.edu

University of Virginia, United States of America

“A book is not an isolated being: it is a relationship, an axis of innumerable
relationships.” Jorge Luis Borges's words resonate not only with much of my
work on book history, but also with my ongoing digital mapping project of the
publishing industry in twentieth-century Argentina. The central aim of my
current research is a materially informed look into Borges's process of
production in the early part of his literary career (1930-1951): who were his
primary publishers? What types of editorial jobs did he hold? Which works were
independently printed and which did others fund? What can we tell about his
development of aesthetics based on analysis of typography and paper choices? By
asking these types of questions about Borges's preferences toward the
publication of his own works, we also find that he had a very specific taste
for the look and feel of others' books and, in one of his early works from this
period, makes a snide, and extremely revealing, remark about
second-hand bookstores as nothing more than “turgid purgatories.” In light of
the fact that the places in which a book is published, printed, and even
purchased are all key characteristics of that specific volume, I am creating
a project with Leaflet and Jekyll that allows me to think deeply about the
spatial (and temporal) evolution of the process of publication (and, in turn,
the circulation of published works) in Jorge Luis Borges's Argentina 
(1930-1951).

My project has three distinct layers: mapping the industry, grids of contact,
and textual materiality. The first layer uses data from books' colophons and
publishers' catalogues to pinpoint the locations of Borges's printers,
publishing houses, booksellers, and even places of employment throughout the
early part of the twentieth century. The second layer draws on biographical
information from the individuals involved in the Argentine book industry to
highlight their connections and working relationships. The third and
final layer consists of a (visual) catalogue of certain physical aspects of the
books in question including their covers, any illustrations, samples of
typefaces that certain printers utilized, and any colophons or printers' marks.
This data also will include a more general descriptive bibliography of all of
Borges's works published between 1930 and 1951, as well as works that he
edited, prefaced, or translated during this time. In light of the fact that
there are virtually no extant publishers' archives from this historical moment
in Argentina and, furthermore, that much of the ephemeral print material
related to Borges is in private hands, my aim is to provide researchers and any
interested parties with an easily accessible reservoir of data for future
projects. Moreover, the specific data collection and interfacing used for this
project allow for a deeper understanding of Borges's idea of a book as “an axis
of innumerable relationships” and, thus, provide insight into the accessibility
of materials, scarcity of resources, aesthetic features, and canon formation in
Argentina. In a way, I see this project as something that will not only further
material studies (related to the book and publishing history) and digital
projects in Southern Cone Literature, but also something that will serve a much
wider audience.

