Collaborative Approaches to Open up Russian Manuscript Lexicons

Kira Kovalenko

kira.kovalenko@gmail.com

Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria

Eveline Wandl-Vogt

eveline.wandl-vogt@oeaw.ac.at

Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria

In this paper, the authors introduce a new research collaboration between the
Institute for Linguistic Studies (St. Petersburg, Russia) and the
Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (Vienna,
Austria), and exemplify multicultural, crossdisciplinary collaboration on
the Ph.D project of Russian manuscript lexicons.

The project is aimed at the online representation of the Russian manuscript
lexicons, which reflect a very important stage in Russian lexicography and
served as a basis for the printed dictionaries appeared later.
This lexicographical genre (called azbukovnik in Russian) appeared in the
middle of the 16th century on the base of glossaries, and differ from them by
the alphabetical order of the word entries. About 150 manuscripts, mostly from
the 17th century, containing the lexicons came into our hands. The tradition of
copying manuscript lexicons preserved in the Old Believers communities, and the
latest lexicon dates from the beginning of the 20th century. Lexicons
were classified by L.S.Kovtun in the 1989, and some additions were made later
by K.I.Kovalenko (for details see Kovalenko, 2016).

Obligatory parts of the word entries were head word (or collocation) and
explanation. Word entries could also contain inscription of the language
source for loan words, lexicographical or literary sources, citations, and
information about topic groups (animals, birds, plants, etc.). Sometimes,
observations on various linguistic topics were included in the word entries as
well. Despite the great importance of these lexicons as Russian language
history resources, only small part of them is available for researchers
(2 published in Kovtun, 1975 and 1989, and 16 can be found online as a
facsimile.

The research idea is formulated collaboratively by the Russian and Austrian
scholars, experienced in (traditional) lexicography as well as in
digital transformation and research infrastructure development. An architecture
to embed the Russian manuscript lexicons into a larger lexical
resources infrastructure is developed based on these visions and needs at the
Austrian Academy of Sciences. Cornerstones of the architecture are opening
up lexical resources and develop as much as possible (due to different types of
licensing) freely available resources to the broader public which meet the 
open science definition.

The established architecture consists of three layers:

1.    The human interface layer: supports data access e.g. list of
headwords, geographical map, timeline and other visual approaches etc., which
is further developed with every new project. Furthermore, via authentification
it offers a private workspace.

2.    The persistent layer: offers a data repository, e.g. triple store, open
access repository to sustainable store and interlink data.

3.    The enrichment    layer:    offers

opportunities and tools to interlink data and collaboratively enrich data, e.g.
with Wikidata or Europeana.

Ideally, all Russian manuscript lexicons in text format and as facsimiles
should be included in the research data environment. As a first step,
main representatives of each lexicon type are represented. The plain text is
marked up in TEI and is provided with metadata which include standardised form
of the head word, information about its origin, foreign etymon for loan words
(such as anouToAog for anocrojit) and topic group designation. Word entries
contain metadata about lexicographical or literary sources. In case that the
facsimile is available, it will be presented along with the text form of the
lexicon.

The project is aimed, on one hand, at the representation of the most important
lexicons in marked up textual form and as facsimile (if possible). On other
hand, the search engine embedded in the infrastructure will make it possible to
create enquiries to the data and make selections such as: words according to
their origin, literary or lexicographical

sources, words belonging to a particular topic groups and so on. The
manuscripts will be semantically exploited and concept-based, interlinked
with knowledge resources in the linked open data framework (for more details
see Kovalenko et al., 2016). For example, interlinking with Europeana
will increase the accessibility and reusability of the data. Thus, the project
will make Russian lexicons available and open them for further research and for
public curiosity.

The poster will introduce the collaborative approach, the roles of the partners
and their contributions, discuss the technical framework based on the research
approach and present recent results the first time.

The project is connected to the COST action IS 1305 European Network of
electronic Lexicography (ENeL).

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the RGNF (the Russian Humanitarian Scientific
Fund), project Ns 1634-01008 “Russian manuscript dictionaries as a cultural
phenomenon: the history of the ganre and literary context”.

