Site-specific Cultural Infrastructure: Promoting Access and Conquering
the Digital Divide

Andre Goodrich

andre.doodrich@nwu.ac.za

North-West University, South Africa

Gustaf T emplehoff

mrgustaft@gmail.com

North-West University, South Africa

Juan Steyn

juan.steyn@nwu.ac.za

North-West University, South Africa

The ability to create and deploy networking technologies able to deliver
relevant content over multiple platforms has until very recently depended on
access to costly technology, infrastructure and expertise. The result has been
a digital divide that is particularly acute in highly unequal economic
contexts like South Africa. The potential of ICT to democratize the public
realm, currently dominated by large media houses catering to individuals with
the economic means to access costly data services, has not been realized.

The increased availability of cheap, open-source technologies, along with the
growth of communities of users around these technologies, has made possible new
kinds of digital publics beyond the abovementioned constraints.

Drawing on these technologies we have developed a freestanding platform capable
of empowering users to create, publish and access their own network-dependent
projects. We have done this using a solar-powered single-board computer
(Raspberry Pi) and have tested its application in two projects: a site-specific
digital literature project; and a virtual site-specific museum of apartheid-era
forced removals. Both are based in the city of Potchefstroom in South Africa’s
North West Province.

Site-specific digital literature project

Site-specific digital literature, by allowing users to access place-bound,
multimodal digital literature via mobile devices, opens doors for creative
expression, place making as well as experiencing traditional texts in a new
way. It can also contribute to a better understanding of the relationship
between digital interfaces, spatiality and people and empower people in terms
of what is called place-making practices (Kaye, 2000:203; Turner & Davenport,
217-220).

Byderhand (Byderhand.net, 2016), is a site-specific digital literature project
launched during the 2015 Aardklop National Arts Festival in
Potchefstroom, South Africa. Users accessed multimodal texts on their mobile
devices through QR-codes deployed around various sites at the North-West
University. Byderhand was awarded the Aartvark prize for a ground
breaking production, and the team was approached to host similar productions
elsewhere. In 2016 the Byderhand-project and platform were used in
various educational contexts. Most recently, the Byderhand-team, assisted 1st
additional language (Afrikaans) learners at a Potchefstroom secondary school
to publish their own site-specific digital literature on the school grounds.

Although there is a demand for expansion of the Byderhand-project, cost and
scalability are limiting factors. First, in its current form, implementing
the project requires a team of dedicated members. is Second, functionality
depends on the provision, maintenance and upgrading of infrastructure such
as servers and physical QR-codes. On the user end, mobile data cost is a
constraining factor.

Therefore, we explored the design of the infrastructure for an automated
platform that could empower a low-skilled user, to create, publish and access
their own projects. This was important as usability of a platform can ether
promote access or restrict it through the way the interface is developed 
(Shneiderman, B. 2003).

The infrastructure chosen was a single-board computer (Raspberry Pi) and a
platform was developed based on open standards.

Virtual museum project

South Africa’s heritage landscape remains largely skewed in ways that exclude
intangible heritage such as stories and memories of such events as
apartheid-era forced removals. A virtual museum of forced removals aids in
remedying this by offering an in situ space where people can give voice to
their experience and preserve it for future generations.

The city of Potchefstroom was one of the first places where forced removals
took place during the apartheid regime but little historical records
exist outside oral accounts and some pictures of what took place. The platform
we developed provides access for a community to tell their own story without
the need for expensive infrastructure. It can provide a place
for reconciliation, healing and understanding the intricacies of racial
tensions within the context of a specific community.

In summary our paper reports on prototyping a cheap, scalable system,
independent of electricity and data costs that can allow users to add and
access content for both these projects. In particular, the paper considers the
following:

1.    How the prototype platform enables users to publish multimodal texts and
multimedia (e.g. audio, images and video) on their own.

2.    How the prototype platform provides an easy way to consume published work
using entry-level smartphones.

3.    The scalability of this cultural infrastructure, with regard to expanding
multimodal site-specific literature and museums along with the creation of
site-specific corpora.

4.    Educational applications:

a.    How the platform could be ported into other applications such as
freestanding, free-access libraries for schools and community centers.

b.    Educational possibilities created that can introduce students to the
world of digital literature.

c.    A lesson in the value of interdisciplinary collaborations.

5.    Building collaborative communities and empowering them to tell their own
stories.

6.    Mini-showcase of the project

