Interfacing Collaborative and Multiple-Layered Spaces of Interpretation in
Humanities Research. The Case of Semantically-Enhanced Objective Hermeneutics

Christoph Schindler

schindler@dipf.de

German Institute for International Educational Research Germany

Cornelia Veja

veja@dipf.de

German Institute for International Educational Research Germany

Helge Kminek

kminek@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany

Introduction

In recent years, semantically enhanced Digital Humanities Research has become a
widespread topic realized in different environments (e.g. CWRC, Pundit). While
semantic graph technologies are mainly used to connect, annotate, query and
aggregate strictly formalized entities, there is a lack of interfaces for
enhancing acts of interpretations.

Annotations are described as crucial in interpretations and are designated as a
killer application (Juola,

2009)    , scholarly primitive (Unsworth, 2000) and considered as notetaking
within main scholarly information activities (Palmer, et al. 2009). Concerning
an interpretational act, limitations of annotations are identified
(overlapping, flexibility), and there is a demand for customization to the
research context and an iterative and agile of schema development (Piez,

2010)    . Drucker indicates the emergent qualities of interpretation, while
suggesting an interface which “supports acts of interpretation rather than
simply returning selected results from a pre-existing data set” (Drucker, 2013:
37). In this paper, this desideratum is addressed by designing an interface for
collaborative and multi-layered spaces of interpretations based on a semantic
graph (Suchman, 2007; Drucker, 2011; Rheinberger, 2010; Barad, 2003).

A specific style of interpretation is chosen as a case study, i.e.
collaborative analysis of face-to-face situations in small groups by creating a
multiple layered space of interpretation - Objective Hermeneutics.
In German-speaking countries, the approach of Objective Hermeneutics is one of
the main methodologies used for qualitative analysis (Flick, 2005), which
generates deep-structure analyses of cases by reconstructing actions and
meanings. Creation of an interface that enables semantic annotations for these
acts of interpretations makes it possible to elaborate and explicate a multiple
layered space of interpretation.

In the following, we describe settings in the inter-pretational act of
Objective Hermeneutics. Furthermore, the background of the design is outlined
in relation to methods, design and data. The main contribution is twofold: (i)
realization of an interface focusing the semantic enhancement of the
collaborative spaces of interpretation and accountability and (ii) examines the
semantic explication of the research data (interactional protocols), the
interlinked multiple layered annotations and the possibility to retrace the
space of interpretation.

The collaborative interpretational act of Objective Hermeneutics

The theoretical framework of Objective Hermeneutics is based on Oervermann's
theory of professionalization (see Reichertz, 2004), whereby the act of
interpretation follows strict principles for analyzing ‘natural protocols' of
social practices (transcripts). In a sequential multi-step procedure of
interpretation, the structure of the case is reconstructed. The act of
interpretation is realized in small groups where a common space of imagination
is created collaboratively, wherein multiple layers of interpretations
interfere and make use of falsification and abduction (Flick, 2005).
Accordingly, the process of interpretation can be outlined as follows: 1)
Specifying research question and analytical framework; 2) choosing
appropriate transcript; 3) selecting sequence from interaction protocol
(transcript); 4) creating and discussing step by step multiple corresponding
stories, perspectives, and connections of the sequence; 5) recontextualisation
to the concrete case, whereby in the long run hypotheses of the structure of
the case are created iteratively and new sequences are selected (back to 3.).
Additionally, 6) a proofing process is started (falsification). Based on this
interpretative act, a detailed case structure is created which describes the
conflicting motivations, interests and interactions of the actors. While in
recent years special research data archives for archiving and re-using the
transcripts (non-processable PDFs) have been established, the act of
interpretation itself is still paper-based. This situation provides the
opportunity for an appropriate case study for designing an interface for
collaborative and multi-layered spaces of interpretations (for example, see the
archive for pedagogical casuistry (ApaeK) archiving transcripts of classroom
interactions)

Methods, design, and data

The research environment for Objective Hermeneutics is based on a participatory
design and agile development approach, using Semantic MediaWiki framework. To
fulfill the case-related special research requirements an extension for
Semantic MediaWiki and a research ontology were collaboratively developed.
Besides the analysis of needs and requirements (site visit, artefact analysis)
rapid prototyping was used and three versions of the environment were
thoroughly tested (the logfile analysis between the last two

versions indicates a clear improvement at the interpretation process by
reducing the break up rate from 33% to 0%.) A group of distributed researchers
across Germany and interested in classroom interactions (topic othering) used
the environment in practice over several months and supported the design
process by attending meetings and giving feedback.

Interfacing collaborative spaces of interpretations and accountability

Explicating    interaction    protocols

semantically

The act of interpretation in Objective Hermeneutics is based on ‘natural
protocols' of social practice, which pursue strict notation guidelines for the
transcription process (e.g. anonymization, settings of actors, properties like
loudness). The transcript is enriched with contextual metadata (e.g. collecting
context, duration, and topic). Line by line, each speech act of an actor
and relevant interactions are described in detail (based on audio recordings,
maps, photographs). This initial base already allows for semantically enhancing
the space of interpretation: Interlinking relevant documents, entities,
properties, and relations for semantic browsing (Figure 1, 1+2). Additionally,
a formula semantically (Figure 1, 3+4) outlines the interactions of the
transcript in detail (actor, speech act/interaction, line number). Thus, each
annotation of interpretation can be related to this empirical level and the
process of interpretation can be retraced. Based on this semantically enhanced
transcript, the researchers choose and define their sequence of interest to
start their act of interpretation (segment selection).

scnultorm:    Gymnasiim    Q

[514-1]

□

Figure 1. Metadata of transcript (1, 2) and semantic interactions (3, 4)

Interlinking spaces of interpretation and multiple layered annotations

The act of interpretation in Objective Hermeneutics is semantically-enhanced
and explicated by following guidelines for interpretation, whereby the
flexibility of interpretation and the computer-mediated co-presence is taken
into account. Each selected sequence of the transcript opens up the space of
interpretation through multiple layered styles of annotations
(stories, perspectives, connections, and contextualization) (Figure 2, 2+3).
Subject to their discussions and notes, the researchers specify their arguments
and elaborate a common ground for the case analysis. For an adequate interface
of the phenomenon, the multiple layered styles of annotations need to be
visualized in relation to the corresponding sequence of the transcript (compare
Figure 2, 1+3). Closure respectively densification of the space of
interpretation is semantically enhanced by creating specific case hypotheses.
Researchers create connections between the layered annotations and specific
case hypotheses, whereby a hypothesis and its related entities (e.g. layer of
annotation, sequence, interaction, actor, or author) can be browsed
semantically, described with texts and data representations. Each annotation is
described with further relevant properties (e.g. timestamp, researcher name,
related sequence) and interlinked within the sematic graph.

[514-2]

Figure 2. Selected sequences (1), annotation creation (2), and multiple layered
annotations and discussions (3)


Retracing the spaces of interpretation and accountability

The analysis and reflection of the research process as well as the spaces of
interpretation are enhanced by using a semantic graph and explicating the
interaction protocols (transcripts) offering new capacities for retracing the
spaces of interpretations (Figure 3). The multiple layered semantic graph
interlinks the acts of interpretation and facilitates multiple perspectives
for accountability concerning the 1) interaction protocols and their
interlinking (Figure 4, 2), 2) the chronological acts of the researchers, 3)
the multiple layered annotations for interpretations (Figure 4, 1), and 4)
the creation and interlinking of the case hypothesis. Besides these imminent
possibilities of the research project, external aspects of accountability can
be addressed. While in Humanities the practice of data citations is not widely
spread, research communities in Object Hermeneutics have established a citation
practice via the archives of the transcripts, referring to the interactions of
the transcript in their publications (as bibliographic data). In retracing the
spaces of interpretation, the relevant multiple layers of annotations as well
as the hypothesis interlinking can be referenced, opened, and described with
semantic vocabularies. The semantic graph has been mapped to relevant semantic
vocabularies e.g. Wf4Ever Research Object Model (ro), Object Reuse and Exchange
(ore),

Named Graphs (rdfg), Web Annotation Data Model.

[514-3]

[514-4]

Figure 4. Annotation layer of stories (1) and interactive datatable of
interactions (2)


Discussion and outlook

In this paper, we discussed and demonstrated the design of an interface for
collaborative and multi-layered spaces of interpretation, using the
methodological approach of ‘Objective Hermeneutics' as a case study. The
interface is considered in relation to the phenomenon and the relevant 
performative material-discursive capacities for the interpretational act,
focusing on the use of a semantic graph. The detailed semantic description of
the research data (transcripts) and the associated spaces of interpretations
(stories, perspectives, connections, and contextualisations along with
hypothesis) enable a collaborative and distributed analysis and new ways of
retracing the spaces of interpretation (interlinked data, chronological
acts, multiple layered annotations, case hypothesis). But time and effort of
the semantic enhancement need to be balanced against these added values in each
new research project (e.g. interlinking, accountability, data manipulation,
visualisation, citation, and openness).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the research groups in Ob-jectiv Hermeneutics and
Semantic CorA, especially Marc Rittberger, Michael Meier and Sascha Kabel.
Initially, the realization of the research environment Semantic CorA was
supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG); its further development for
Objective Hermeneutics was funded in the context of the eHumanities Center
CEDIFOR by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
no. 01UG1416C.

