A Case Study of Automated Curation of Digital Archives

Fabiola Hanna

fhanna@ucsc.edu

UC Santa Cruz, United States of America

Access to digital archives has been well problema-tized in recent years. For
example, should one have access to an archive by default or should one belong
to a

community in order to gain access to that knowledge,-such as with Mukurtu CMS
which builds on knowledge heritage in indigenous groups (Christen 2007)?
Another thread with regards to access and archives is the trend of dumping all
the data, and claiming that because of this, the individual and/or the
organization is somehow more transparent (as seen with various initiatives such
as data.gov). But many have also shown that there is no raw data (Gitelman
2013). I propose to build on these two threads in order to argue that 1) paying
attention to the medium and its parameters is important, and 2) that archives
need to be sifted and curated in order for them to be properly accessible.
I will illustrate both of these arguments with my project, We Are History: A
People's History of Lebanon, which is in its final stage of development and
will have been released publicly before DH2017.

Digital Humanities (DH) projects are, in varying degrees, led by the desire to
engage with a wider public. Some often include actions such as inviting
participants to share their stories, images, audio clips, drawings, and videos.
Many DH projects place these contributions in an audio or video database
displayed in full on a webpage, not unlike oral history transcripts ending up
in a dusty closet. To build on one of the most successful digital storytelling
projects, it is useful to examine the Storycorps team, who have been collecting
ordinary oral histories in video form and archiving them in full as a record of
American history using booths and a mobile application. The Storycorps
team knows very well that if it did not curate and edit together shorter
versions, then few users would listen to the longer interviews in full, let
alone several at a time.

Francis X Blouin and William G. Rosenberg trace the intersection of history and
archives and found that Ranke, during the Enlightenment, conceptualized history
as a scientific endeavor in that truth could be extracted from archives through
rigorous methodologies. This led to the idea that documents could “speak for
themselves” (Blouin, 24), as if simply making documents available, without
providing context of any sort, would reveal their inner truth. This is one
of many cases where the reading of documents is taken for granted. It also
ignores the effect that archivists have on the collecting, saving, and indexing
of documents. Influential archivists such as Terry Cooke, Richard Brown and
Brian Brothman have brought about new attitudes to repositories with an
acknowledgment of the effect that archivists have on documents (as quoted by
Cox, 33). This relatively recent push in archival theory, therefore, points to
the flaws in the claim that documents on their own can represent themselves:
that would be ignoring all the various power relationships at play, as well as
the medium itself in which the data is codified.

This is more directly seen in the tagging of videos and their categorization
without additional interpre-tational work, such as in the Oral History
Metadata Synchronizer (OHMS) tool developed at the Louie B. Nunn Center for
Oral History University of Kentucky Libraries. This will to not “add” to these
stories seems to come from the premise that these testimonies should “speak for
themselves”; that no added interpretation is needed, even that any added
interpretation distracts from the directness of the stories. But this often
also means the medium and its effects on these stories are not carefully
examined.

In pursuit of generating communal dialogue in the context of inability to have
conversations about our contested history in Lebanon, I set out to build an
Artificial Agent that would sift through an oral history video archive of
testimonies of daily life with the task of figuring out common threads,
sometimes confirming and sometimes contesting each other, and automatically
editing many different versions of possible histories. This automatic montage
machine addresses two problems in the Lebanese context: first, it circumvents
the tiring accusation of being biased since a machine is now the moderator
(presenting a multiplicity of stories might be the closest one can get to
strategic objectivity) and second, it opens up the possibility of conversation
by weaving various and often opposing perspectives in order to start imagining
what our histories could look like. The project, which would reside online as
well as in booths in public spaces across Lebanon, invites people to listen to
an automated montage of oral histories and to then share their own stories and
memories. Each newly contributed story is added

to the archive, analyzed using new developments in computational corpus-based
linguistics, automatic story generation, and social computing, and tagged with
its transcript, which enables the interface to incorporate newly added video
interviews into the pool concerning the event discussed

