Data Visualization in Archival Finding Aids: A New Paradigm for Access

Anne Bahde

anne.bahde@oregonstate.edu

Oregon State University Libraries and Press United States of America

Cole Crawford

cole.crawford@oregonstate.edu

Oregon State University, United States of America

Archival finding aids (also called collection guides) are meant to enhance
access to archival collections for researchers, and have been presented online
for almost two decades. However, researchers still struggle to understand and
use them, and the poor functionality of finding aids can often impede the
research process. Online finding aids frequently violate many tenets of basic
web usability by presenting large blocks of text, complex collection
hierarchies, and connections between relevant materials in arcane and
unintuitive formats. Many scholars in the humanities have struggled with
archival discovery and navigation systems in the course of their research or
teaching; cumulatively, these individual annoyances add up to significant
interference in the production of humanities scholarship in the humanities.

Ciaran Trace and Andrew Dillon have argued that user problems with archival
finding aids may be rooted in the system of power inherent in these
tools. According to Trace and Dillon, the traditional archival finding aid has
always “reflected, privileged, enabled, and given control to the writer
(archivist) more so than to the receiver (researcher)” (Dillon 2012). Users of
online finding aids are merely receivers of the information, and in many
systems have no control over how the information is presented, or even what
information is presented. As a static document, the finding aid limits
interpretive possibilities and aggregate analysis, because it cannot be (re)
configured to meet users' research needs. Passive, search-based finding
aid systems hinder researchers' potential for creativity, and obscure
opportunities for serendipitous discovery.

Digital humanities modalities suggest compelling ways to disrupt this power
paradigm. Johanna Drucker has called for “knowledge-generating visualizations,”
which empower the user to produce new interpretations and arguments through
manipulation and augmentation of the data presented (Drucker 2014). Tim
Sherratt has advocated for the development of digital collection interfaces
that enable users to visualize, augment, problematize, and critique collections
and collections data (Sherratt 2011). These appeals invite questions about how
users might respond to finding aids that present archival information in newly
visual ways. What happens for the user when archival finding aids are stretched
beyond traditional modalities to invite new interpretations of collections?

This presentation will introduce multiple models for including visualizations
in both individual finding aids and discovery systems. Using case studies
derived from pilot projects at Oregon State University's Special Collections
and Archives Research Center (SCARC), the presenters will discuss models that
allow the researcher (and the archivist) to compare, match, recognize,
distinguish, arrange, combine, construct, and organize data across a
constellation of data points in ways that traditional, textual finding aids
cannot. Models discussed will include proof-of-concept designs for interactive
geographic timelines, force-directed network graphs, circle packing units,
cluster force designs, alluvial diagrams, and treemaps that enable “distant
reading” of a finding aid or corpus of finding aids. These visualizations allow
users to identify patterns over time or space, relationships between
collections, proportions between categories of data, and more. The presenters
will explore how these visualizations can impact every stage of the research
process, including topic exploration, identification of relevant archival
collections, and establishing context and background.

[556-1]

Figure 1: Example of circle-packing of letter keywords from “Global Bonds:
Public Activism and Agency in the Letters of Linus Pauling”

[556-2]

Figure 2: Example of force-directed network graph of related collections

Using several enhanced finding aids designed to promote access to archival
materials, the presenters will examine practical considerations for
researchers and archivists interested in creating visually enhanced digital
finding aids. These considerations include platform selection, tool design,
scalability, and data repurposing. SCARC faculty and staff work on multiple
platforms, each tailored to specific project needs; choosing the right digital
platform is critical to the long-term sustainability of a project, and this
choice has only become more difficult with the proliferation of
content management systems, digital publishing tools, and repository solutions.

Similarly, selecting the right development frameworks and types of
visualizations for a certain data source can either enhance or limit a
project's potentialities. While the presenters have found success
with libraries and tools such as d3.js, Leaflet, Sigma.js, and RAW, each
archival discovery environment bears its own research complications which
necessarily inform tool selection. The presenters will also talk about how both
digital products and data production processes scale by considering project
management and data entry workflows. Finally, the presenters will address how
researchers can incorporate, clean, and repurpose existing data sources into
new digital finding aids by examining a legacy finding aid that was
repurposed and enhanced.

New research in the humanities often begins with consultation of finding aids
and archival research environments. If access to archival collections is
obscured by finding aid presentation and form, opportunities for progressive
and provocative scholarship are concealed. Redesigned interfaces have the
potential to invite new interpretations of collections, to
encourage experimentation with research methods, and to plant new seeds of
inspiration. Pairing new paradigms of visualization with recently proposed
concepts of arrangement and description can open exciting possibilities;
rhizomatic organization, for example, interrupts traditional hierarchy,
structure, and power paradigms, and suggests a dynamic, acentric finding aid
with multiple access points. If archivists create tools to make the archival
research process adaptive and dynamic for users with different research needs,
humanities scholars are empowered to pursue paths of inquiry never before
revealed by traditional access tools.

