Research Computing's Demand for Humanists, and Vice Versa

Quinn Dombrowski

quinnd@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley, United States of America

Tassie Gniady

ctgniady@iu.edu

Indiana University, United States of America

Megan Meredith-Lobay

megan.lobay@ubc.ca

University of British Columbia, Canada

Jeffrey Tharsen

tharsen@uchicago.edu

University of Chicago, United States of America

Lee Zickel

lxz11@case.edu

Case Western Reserve University

United States of America

Over the last five years, research computing has undergone a shift from
focusing on running infrastructure for highly technical researchers, primarily
in the sciences, to supporting medium- to large-scale computational needs
across a wide range of disciplines, where practitioners fall across
the spectrum of technical proficiency.

This shift in approach has opened up new opportunities, both for scholars whose
research questions are facilitated by computationally intensive algorithms
(e.g. photogrammetry, natural language processing, OCR at scale), and for
humanists in support positions that require translation between technical and
non-technical audiences. This panel will discuss opportunities for research and
career development through the perspectives of research IT staff whose
backgrounds in both humanistic inquiry and computational and digital
methodologies enable them to engage in outreach to, training of, and
support for humanities researchers. It will also provide practical suggestions
for humanists who could benefit from research computing resources but find it
difficult to navigate the expectations of research IT organizations.

The communication, writing, and teaching skills cultivated through an advanced
degree in the humanities align with employment trends in research IT groups.
While some familiarity and comfort with computation is generally a requirement
for working in research IT, advanced programming or system administration
skills are crucial for a minority of positions in these groups. As the mandate
of research computing groups has expanded, it has become increasingly clear
that successful research computing programs require documentation that
is comprehensible to a non-technical audience, hands-on workshops for
non-specialists, and staff capable of understanding the fundamentals of
researchers’ work and identifying effective approaches to meeting
their computation needs. To that end, in 2014 the US National Science
Foundation funded the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure - Research and
Education Facilitators (ACI-REF) program, which developed a cohort of
computation “facilitators” across a number of universities who could "maximize
the impact of investment in research computing" by “assisting] researchers in
leveraging ACI resources for themselves” and sharing solutions
among participating institutions (NSF 2014). This approach to providing support
has been highly influential among campus research IT organizations, and
related workshops such as the ACI-REF virtual residency (featuring plenaries
such as “Effective Communication: How to talk to researchers about their
research” and “Writing Grant Proposals”) have drawn large crowds (Neeman et al.
2016).

Similarly, the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE),
funded by the National Science Foundation, has begun specifically reaching out
to disciplines that have been typically under-represented in the high
performance computing arena, including those in the humanities. XSEDE has a
program called Extended Collaborative Support Services (ECSS) that partners
humanities scholars and others from under-represented areas with computing
professionals who can help them achieve their desired research objectives
(Wilkins-Diehr et al. 2016). This has been both necessary and fruitful
particularly in areas that are focused on data analytics (such as video
analysis, image analysis, network analysis, etc.), as opposed to the
more traditional simulation and modeling done by scientists and engineers.
XSEDE’s Novel and Innovative Projects group includes a specialist in digital
humanities, as well as specialists in pertinent related areas such as big data
analytics.

Along the same lines, in January 2014, Compute Canada hired a full-time Digital
Humanities coordinator to lead a national team supporting researchers wanting
to engage with national advanced research computing (ARC) resources.
Compute Canada, a national non-profit organization incorporated in 2012, plans
and oversees panCanadian ARC resources used for big data
analysis, visualization, data storage, software, portals and platforms for
research computing serving Canadian academic and research institutes. The
national support team for Compute Canada now consists of the full-time DH
coordinator, and a large geographically dispersed team that meets bi-weekly to
coordinate national initiatives like training at the Digital Humanities Summer
Institute and national competitions such as the recent partnership
between Compute Canada and the Canadian Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council. The DH team also meets locally with humanities researchers at their
own institutions to help them leverage national infrastructure, and shares
experiences and advice back to the national team to help in developing
tools, services, and training opportunities that will benefit the national DH
community (Simpson 2015).

One of the interesting ramifications of these changes in IT staffing trends is
the addition of humanists to IT-based groups in high performance computing,
cyberinfrastructure, visualization, and data architectures--humanists who are
called upon to maintain both a deep understanding of computational systems, as
well as track the needs of scholars in the humanities, which tend to be quite
different from researchers in the “hard” or social sciences. Often, they are
the lone humanist in a group dominated by engineers and computer scientists.
There is a clear need and desire to expand the use of computational resources
into "non-traditional" (i.e., non-hard-sciences) disciplines, both to justify
an institutionwide investment in research computing, and as a way of building
institutional capacity for supporting digital humanities scholarship (as
described in the forthcoming 2017 ECAR/CNI white paper on institutional digital
humanities support). Nonetheless, institutions are struggling with translating
their services into comprehensible and relevant offerings for humanities
researchers. Finding effective means of supporting these researchers within the
traditional model of the research IT group has also been a challenge, given the
ways that it differs from library-based support models with which scholars are
more familiar. Panelists will reflect on projects they have worked on that
successfully bridged the humanities-research computing divide, to the benefit
of both groups.

As one example, at Indiana University, a workflow for teaching text analysis
with R has been developed that uses web-based Shiny scripts to introduce
an algorithm, highly annotated RNotebooks explaining each line of code, lightly
annotated RScripts allowing for remixing and adaptation, and, finally, RScripts
to leverage multicore environments. The scripts use data both from literature
and Twitter, and these tutorials consistently draw the highest attendance in
the series DH for Humanists, held throughout the semester. Individual research
projects using more sophisticated algorithms such as NER and LDA have also
grown out of this project.

As another example, at the University of Chicago, the recently-developed Visual
Text Explorer provides a new type of framework for reading texts along with a
range of user-customizable analytics, allowing for simultaneous close and
distant reading. Other humanities research computing projects include web-based
data-driven animated interactive mapping systems, tools for comparative
sequence analysis across literary corpora, and automated aggregators of ranges
of specific secondary data sources to inform the reading of specific texts/
types of texts, all of which require no knowledge of computer programming
by the user but nonetheless leverage research computing resources.

At UC Berkeley, 3D modeling work by Near Eastern Studies scholars that uses
photogrammetry software running on the high-performance compute cluster
has been helpful for testing new Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) nodes in the
cluster.

Finally, panelists will provide recommendations for how humanities scholars can
translate their research projects in ways that will make them
more comprehensible and compelling for institutional research IT groups that
may not have a humanist on their support staff.

Panel participants

Quinn Dombrowski is the Digital Humanities Coordinator in Research IT at UC
Berkeley. Research IT supports research data management, museum informatics,
and computationally intensive research across all domains. She is the author of
Drupal for Humanists and has an MA in Slavic linguistics and an MLIS from the
University of Illinois.

Tassie Gniady is the manager of the Cyberinfrastructure for Digital Humanities
Group at Indiana University. The CyberDH group focuses on workflows for text
analysis and photogrammetry. She also teaches an Introduction to Digital
Humanities course in the Information and Library Science School. Tassie has a
Ph.D in early modern literature from UC-Santa Barbara and an MIS from Indiana
University.

Megan Meredith-Lobay is the Digital Humanities and Social Sciences Scientific
Analyst for the University of British Columbia's Advanced Research Computing
Department. She is also part of WestGrid and Compute Canada, the Canadian HPC
national infrastructure platform. Megan has a PhD from the University of
Cambridge Department of Archaeology in which she explored the early Christian
archaeology of Argyll, Scotland using GIS and early online archaeological
databases.

force". In XSEDE16 Proceedings of the XSEDE16 Conference on Diversity, Big
Data, and Science at Scale. ACM: New York. DOI: 10.1145/2949550.2949584

Simpson, J. (2015). “Building Support for Digital Humanities”. Compute Canada
blog. https://www.com-putecanada.ca/blog/building-support-for-digital-hu-

manities/

Wilkins-Diehr, N., et al. (2016)“An Overview of the XSEDE Extended
Collaborative Support Program” in High Performance Computer Applications, ed.
Isidoro Gitler and Jaime Klapp. Springer Link:    2016.

http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-

319-32243-8 1

Lisa M. Snyde is the director of Campus Research Initiatives for UCLA's Office
of Information Technology, and manager of the GIS, Visualization, and
3D Modeling group for the Institute for Digital Research and Education. She has
a Ph.D. in Architecture and teaches Virtual Reality and 3D Modeling in UCLA's
digital humanities program.

Jeffrey Tharsen is Computational Scientist for the Digital Humanities at the
University of Chicago where he is the lead technical domain expert for digital
and computational approaches to humanistic inquiry. Jeffrey has a Ph.D. from
the University of Chicago's East Asian Languages & Civilizations department,
specializing in the fields of premodern Chinese philology, phonology, poetics
and paleography.

