Active Archives: New Modes of Interaction with Online Archives

Josh Cowls

cowls@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

United States of America

Evan Higgins

elh@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

United States of America

Kurt Fendt

fendt@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

United States of America

This poster presentation will introduce our Active Archives Initiative, through
which we aim to develop new, dynamic ways of representing, researching,
and learning about the past through digital archives. From a traditional
library studies perspective, most online archives are mere digital
repositories, lacking the institutional and hierarchical nature of a
traditional archive. Driven by a growing number of available online resources,
digital technologies and tools that foster social interaction and
collaboration, and open metadata, web standards and APIs, the notion of an
archive continues to shift and expand.

Yet rethinking the definition of an archive is not merely a result of the
digitization of existing cultural knowledge or the advent of born-digital
repositories. Walter Benjamin, for example, thought of his Arcades Project — a
dynamically re-organizable archive of quotes, sources, and references,
developed long before the advent of modern digital technology — as something
that could not leverage its full potential by being bound into a book. More
recently, Wolfgang Ernst in

Digital Memory and the Archive (2013, 81) challenges

the notion of a closed archive by pointing to the fact

that “new archives are successively generated according to current needs ...
the object-oriented archive thus takes shape cumulatively, entailing a shift
from read-only paradigms to a generative, participative form of archival
reading.” Laermans and Gielen (2007), moreover, observe “ a quasi-bifurcation
in the ways the digital archive is observed and evaluated by traditional
archivists and other archive specialists”, relating to the “differences between
old and new media.” As these examples serve to show, not merely archives in
practice, but the idea of an archive in theory, is constantly being redefined
depending on shifting needs, audiences, and available content.

Ernst's notion of a generative, participative mode of archival reading is
central to the approach we introduce here. The core purpose of our Active
Archives initiative is to empower users to engage in ‘story-making', by
discovering, interpreting and re-organizing archived materials to construct new
representations of the past. In some cases, indeed, users might have their own
material to contribute, which we intend to also enable. This we propose drawing
together data and documents from multiple sources to enable multiple groups of
users to reassemble these materials, and in so doing, challenge existing
narratives and reimagine others. In many cases, the materials being used
are only available in photocopy quality at best: the archive we envisage
therefore allows the opportunity for the reinterpretation of valuable but
incomplete resources. Our goal is to make these archives easy to understand and
enjoyable to use, and to design them with a wide range of prospective users in
mind, from professional scholars to high school students.

We have selected two existing projects as prototypes for this initiative. The
US-Iran Relations project, a collaboration with MIT's Center for
International Studies and the partners in the US and abroad, collects and
digitizes governmental documents and testimonies by policymakers relating to
the diplomatic relationship between the United States and Iran during the past
several decades. Our second project, the Blacks in American Medicine archive,
combines tens of thousands of biographical records of African
American physicians with countless primary documents associated with these
practitioners to create a comprehensive archive of all black physicians within
the United States from 1860 to 1980. These projects leverage interactive tools
such as dynamic timelines combined with customizable faceted browsers and
innovative collection and story-making tools, allowing previously untold
narratives and unseen connections to emerge. This will enable, as Ernst
describes, “the digital archive shift to regeneration, (co-)produced by online
users for their own needs” (2013, 95) while simultaneously becoming a source of
dynamic media memory.

As the nature of digital scholarship changes, we need to enable archives to
change as well. As we continue to develop our Active Archives Initiative,
we're putting particular emphasis on the idea that our archival content is not
only accessible but, more importantly, that it is intuitive and useful to
diverse audiences. To that end, we hope to create fully realized, open and
collaborative spaces that foster not only the proliferation of untold stories
but also the ability to interact with these slices of the past in new and
innovative ways. Presenting our work at DH2017 will also allow us to gather
useful feedback from other practitioners in the field of Digital Humanities
looking to similarly shake up the staid notion of an archive. As such, our
poster presentation will offer both technical details, such as screenshots of
the prototype in action, as well as clear description of the functionality and
responses to our user testing.

