VIA: Video-dance, computer-assisted composition and mobile technology

Daniella Aguiar

daniella.aguiar@gmail.com

Federal University of Uberlandia, Brazil

Joao Quieroz

queirozj @gmail.com

Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil

Luiz Casteloes

lecasteloes@gmail.com

Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil

VIA is a mobile art project combining video-dance, computational music and
architecture. Its main goal is to endow public locations of downtown Rio de
Janeiro with video-dance and music, accessed through locative media
(smartphones or tablets). The VIA website is the main way of learning about the
project, as it provides all the necessary information, including a map
that indicates the specific locations where users are able to access the
multimedia pieces of the project. Two “Vias”, or routes, can be selected on the
map, “Via 1” or “Via 2”. Each of them is a distinct route on the map
linking specific locations according to landscape features (as we shall explain
in the next section). Although the project suggests experiencing the work
according to these two routes, each viewer can decide how and when they are
going to do so. There is not only one precise route to experience the project:
some may decide to access the content in a single location and then leave,
whereas others might want to visit all the locations creating their own routes
from one point to another. Besides the website, the public can also learn about
the project through printed maps distributed in Rio de Janeiro’s downtown areas
where VIA is located. The distributed maps are the same as the
website’s, except for the fact that there is not a distinction between Vias 1
and 2. It also includes the addresses of the locations in order to guide
viewers through the project. The main technology employed to access the project
is the QR Code. QR Code is a specific twodimensional barcode target that can be
read by barcode readers and phone cameras. Once viewers decide on a location to
start, they must walk to it, where they will find QR Codes on walls, utility
poles, litter bins and others. With a QR code reader application, they must
frame the QR barcode and wait for the content to be loaded. Summarily, any
user equipped with a tablet or smartphone with an Internet connection has free
access to experimental multimedia pieces of video-dance and music while moving
through specific points of Rio de Janeiro. The multimedia content resulted from
the collaboration between Joao Queiroz (artistic director), Daniella Aguiar
(dancer and choreographer), Luiz E. Casteloes (music composer), Adriano Mattos
Correa (architect), Guilherme Landin and Claudia Rangel (video-makers), and
Alfredo Suppia (video editor). Each multimedia product was the result of
artistic investigation taking place between dance, music, and the
architectural richness of Rio de Janeiro urban space, providing pedestrians
with an experience that superposes “navigation” through the city and
contemporary dance and music. The sounds/music accompanying these videos derive
from CAC (Computer-Assisted Composition), CGA (Computer-Generated
Assistance), and Sonification - related approaches. They consist
of image-to-sound conversions using patches developed in OpenMusic. These
conversions employ, as input images, a collection of photographs previously
taken from the locations where the dancing took place. The compositional action
involved consists mainly of normalizing the xy axis data extracted from
the contours of these images within audible ranges. There has been no further
compositional manipulation of the input data - such as displacement, editing,
looping, etc. Two types of location were chosen to create the “vias”. In the
first type, the chosen locations, although varying from open spaces, as
squares, to narrow streets, share the property of being places with ongoing
movement of people. The second type is characterized by building interspaces,
independent of other architectural characteristics. The dance movements were
developed in strict relation to the chosen spots. In this way, the dance is
created in relation both to the buildings and to the passing people. The
audio-visual language is based on discontinuous approaches and withdrawals from
the “theme” (performer), which irregularly repeats short, alternated and cyclic
movements. The video editing is rigorously metric and based on the organization
of parts in regularly juxtaposed sequences. This method fixates and
highlights invariant properties of the landscape algorithmically translated by
the music. One of the project’s main features is that viewers can access the
pieces at the

exact same location where the video and the music were created. As a result,
mobile technology users connected to the Internet are able to access
the multimedia pieces of the project, experiencing environments in which
information and virtual objects “overlap” physical reality.

