Temporal loci and mixed reality: an experiment in diversifying visualizations
of time and space

Celeste Tu'frng Vy Sharpe

csharpe@carleton.edu

Carleton College, United States of America

Sarah Calhoun

scalhoun@carleton.edu

Carleton College, United States of America

Andrew Wilson

awilson@carleton.edu

Carleton College, United States of America

This poster explores ways to use augmented reality to represent complex notions
of temporality. Calls for diversifying the digital humanities by scholars
like Alan Liu, Amy Earhart, Jessica M. Johnson, and Adeline Koh have called
attention to the ways in which digital humanities inquiry and tools often
struggle to represent diverse artifacts, cultures, and experiences. Spatial
inquiry is one area where scholars are critically engaging and presenting
layered analyses of space. Temporality, on the other hand, has received
significantly less attention. Notions of time vary widely across cultures.
Temporal metadata in digital humanities projects such as timelines or
visualizations, however, is frequently constrained by the narrow, linear
Gregorian conception of time crystallized by the International Organization for
Standardization standard 8601

(ISO 8601).

Using Keith Basso's description of temporal loci of events from his 1996 book 
Wisdom Sits in Places, we can see how myth (“in the beginning”; atemporal)
and saga (“modern times”; time described by ISO 8601) frequently overlap and
intertwine with each other (50). For instance, in the Thai Buddhist temple
paintings that Sandra Cate describes in her 2003 book Making Merit, Making Art
(“The Defeat of Mara and The Enlightenment (Panya),” plate 10) we can see the
convergence of multiple different conceptions of time. One striking piece of a
mural captures a moment in time after the recently enlightened Buddha defeats
the demon Mara, and a cleansing flood washes away the Mona Lisa and a space
shuttle. Attempting to fit the complicated relationships displayed in this
image into a simple Dublin Core temporal coverage field would be quite
difficult, if not impossible.

We identify two main problems that this initial experiment will address. The
first is the issue of visualizing multiple temporalities. Our motivating
questions are: what are the visual and spatial relationships between the
chronological story of the Buddha defeating Mara given how some Buddhists
believe that the Buddha is personal and eternal and always present throughout
time? How is that expressed in the mural through a wide range of artistic
styles and historical references? These questions will be answered through the
course of our research.

The second problem is a more practical question of how to use augmented reality
to further research and teaching of these complex cultural concepts when
both the visual and technical resources are limited. We intend to use the
extant low-res photographs available of the “Defeat of Mara” temple mural and
Vuforia to create a cross-platform experience of the religious expression. This
will allow users to see and select individual elements in the mural (such as
the Mona Lisa or the spaceship) and engage with the different ways one can
order and make meaning out of the varied chronologies and temporal references.
Vuforia allows us to use an existing framework that has the benefit of
being accessible on multiple platforms. We believe this is necessary for
facilitating the adoption of augmented reality for classroom and preliminary
research uses.

Our poster will outline our theoretical framework, detail our development
process using the augmented reality framework Vuforia, and provide possible
avenues for further lines of inquiry and applications for temporal
visualizations. We'll include static images of the AR experience, as well as
ways to access our project remotely.

