Add Slander and Stir: Reprinting of Anti-Labor Stories in
Early-Twentieth-Century American Newspapers

Vilja Hulden

vilja.hulden@colorado.edu

University of Colorado-Boulder United States of America

In the opening years of the twentieth century, the National Association of
Manufacturers (NAM), an organization of businessmen vehemently opposed to labor
unions, spearheaded a multifrontal and multi-industry campaign aiming to stop
the rapid growth of labor unions. The NAM itself envisioned publicity and

propaganda - or a "campaign of education," as the NAM liked to call it - as a
key aspect of this campaign. Newspapers, in turn, were to play a crucial role
in the campaign. As the head of the publicity agency the NAM hired said, the
"infantry" of the whole campaign consisted of "the constant repetition of small
paragraphs or short articles throughout the newspapers of the country.”

The publicity bureau promised that getting this “infantry” into the field was
going to be smooth sailing, claiming that "it is easily possible to bring
together the vast majority of papers all over the country in a kind
of syndicate form." With this, the bureau referred to syndication of the type
now familiar to us, but also something specific to the early 20th century:
boilerplate and readyprint. Because typesetting was still very expensive, large
numbers of small country newspapers got part of their paper either preprinted
(readyprint) or as boilerplate (stories that were already typeset and could be
directly printed).

Archival sources show that the NAM, besides hiring a publicity bureau to
badmouth labor unions, also created "newsworthy" events that it hoped to get
into the press without direct payment: these included, for example, staged
anti-union parades and Astroturf antiunion worker organizations. What we do not
know with much certainty, however, is to what extent these efforts were
successful.

This poster reports on a preliminary investigation into the extent to which
stories reproducing the language or viewpoint of anti-labor organized
employers - a language that is quite recognizable if one is familiar with it -
were reprinted in early-twentieth-century American newspapers. It draws on the
Chronicling America database of newspapers and makes use of a reprint detection
algorithm developed for the Viral Texts project. Eventually the aim is to
create as comprehensive an account of such reprinted texts as allowed by the
geographical and other limitations of the Chronicling America collection.

Sources and methodology

The dataset used in this investigation consists of the articles (or rather,
pages) published between 1897 through 1908 that matched the query (worker
OR workers OR workmen OR workman) AND (union) in the Chronicling America
collection. The time period selected reflects the years surrounding the
launching and high point of the employer open shop campaign, including the
NAM's hiring of the publicity bureau noted above.

The identification of reprints is performed using the passim tool developed by
David Smith for the Viral Texts project with the default settings (which were
developed on Chronicling America material). The results are formatted into an
HTML form for easier manual checking; as the algorithm inevitably identifies
irrelevant reprints, the most laborious stage is the culling of the set of
identified repeated passages.

The early-twentieth-century employer anti-union campaign had a recognizable
vocabulary and set of themes, and it is the author's expertise, acquired
developed through research on these employer campaigns, that is the main
“method” for recognizing stories potentially put out by employers.

Results

As of current writing, I have processed 1906, 1907, and, partly, 1908. For
these years I have run the passim algorithm and manually examined the
resulting identified reprinted clusters, which has turned out to be even more
laborious than anticipated.

On the whole, I expected to see more stories clearly planted by NAM or its
allies in readyprint or boilerplate. There are a number of candidates, but
these are both less conclusive and have fewer reprints than I anticipated.
There are, however, a few very widely reprinted clearly paid-for advertisements
excoriating unions.

In some ways, the partly “negative” results in themselves are rather
interesting (they seem not to be at

least entirely due to any failings of the algorithm -widely printed items like
speeches by the President are also prominent among the reprints). They seem
to indicate that despite publicity bureaus' interest in claiming that material
could be easily and discreetly planted, the task of shaping public opinion was
more challenging that the NAM perhaps anticipated. The very fact that
readyprint and boilerplate had to be palatable to a broad cross-section of
papers, in an environment where there still were many labor or proworker
papers, meant that “syndicated” material needed to be bland and apolitical to
sell. Perhaps the democratic role of the press was better protected
than expected?

