Constructing Linked Knowledge around Southeast Asian Studies

Akihiro Kameda

kameda@cseas.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Center for Integrated Area Studies

Kyoto University, Japan

Shoichiro Hara

shara@cseas.kyoto-u.ac.jp Center for Integrated Area Studies Kyoto University,
Japan

To understand an academic humanities paper, it is crucial to understand each
element in the paper (person, place, mention of another paper, etc.). To
understand each element in the paper, we have to refer to knowledge outside of
the paper; in other words, linked knowledge is important. Linked Open Data
(LOD) (Heather and Bizer, 2011), which is emerging from research in the
Semantic Web, provides the way to represent and share such linked knowledge.

We prepared texts of "Japanese Journal of Southeast Asian Studies" as a core
dataset, in order to attempt to link words or documents in the core dataset

to external resources such as DBpedia (also available in Japanese) or the 
National Diet Library in Japan.

Though LOD has been growing rapidly (Schmachtenberg, 2014), it is difficult to
cover specific knowledge in each academic paper. Therefore, the publication of
LOD is also an important effort to represent knowledge networks in academic
humanities papers.

The Center for Integrated Area Studies, Kyoto University (CIAS) has developed
two information tools, named MyDatabase (MyDB) and Resource Sharing System
(RSS), to solve these difficulties. The main component of MyDB is a database
builder, allowing humanities researchers to construct and revise databases
without expert knowledge. MyDB stores metadata and accepts any vocabulary of
metadata, including nonstandard vocabularies. This enables humanities
researchers to use their own metadata vocabulary according to their own
purposes. On the other hand, those metadata varieties make the integration
processes difficult. RSS was developed to integrate heterogeneous databases on
the Internet, and to provide users with a uniform interface to retrieve
databases seamlessly in one operation. Thus, MyDB and RSS have helped
accelerate open data in the humanities. However, there are still two problems
to solve, especially in the case of RSS: limited coverage of databases and
initial costs of integration. First, for example, Kyoto University released
KULINE (OPAC), KU-RENAI (repository), KURRA (archive), Open Course Ware and
various databases developed by each research institute in the university, but
RSS does not integrate these databases. Second, it is time consuming to
integrate new databases into RSS and impossible to trace links automatically.
As such, for now, RSS is not the appropriate tool to discover hints and/or
create new knowledge.

To overcome these drawbacks, a new project has been launched to develop an
innovative information platform for open humanities data. This platform
comprises three sublayers. The first layer is "Open Data Layer" which
accumulates heterogeneous metadata. This layer uses RDF to describe data of
different structures. The second layer is "Data Link Layer." This layer uses
ontology techniques such as RDFS and OWL to link ambiguous (uncontrolled)
vocabularies and emerge "humanities big data.” The third layer is "Application
Layer." As big data in the humanities is too huge and complicated to retrieve,
categorize, and analyze by hand, this layer provides utilities to process
big data. This platform will prepare for APIs to help mashup applications. We
expect the platform to reconstruct a knowledgebase from heterogeneous
databases, which is used to construct meaningful chunks from scattered data.

Thus, humanities Linked Open Data has been developed, and the "Japanese Journal
of Southeast Asian Studies" dataset can be linked to that LOD. This
linked knowledge can then help readers from other domains.

[619-1]

