Placing Segregation

Robert Shepard

robert-shepard@uiowa.edu

University of Iowa Libraries, United States of America

Residential segregation and socioeconomic inequality among neighborhoods is
common in many American cities. Many large American cities became modern
industrial urban places during the mid- to late-nineteenth century, so it is
critical to understand the reality of human dimensions in cities during
this period. Popular narratives tracing the history of the phenomenon back to
that time have been constructed from analyses that used city wards or other
large unit areas that aggregate data for many hundreds or even thousands of
families. For example, prominent works

like American Apartheid have concluded that black

Americans were not particularly segregated from whites before 1900, and even
then they were only slightly more separated from the native white population as
the Irish and German immigrants (Massey and Denton 1993). By relying on
aggregate datasets from the past, urban historians have been missing out on
a level of granularity that would provide better measurements of segregation as
well as critical context of spatial separation, given the relative smallness
of American cities during their earlier years.

Mid-nineteenth century U.S. Census records contained an abundance of potential
information relating to socioeconomic realities of each home during this key
formative period in American history. The 1860 and 1870 censuses were
especially unique in that they collected each individual's personal estate
value and real estate value (these economic variables were omitted from
subsequent censuses). However, American census takers did not record address
numbers of those they visited before 1880, which was after the Bureau of the
Census stopped collecting these critical economic data about individuals and
households. Furthermore, even if address data were available on manuscript
census records for the time period, much of the built environment has changed
since the mid nineteenth century, including the complete renaming of roads and
- most importantly - the renumbering of houses along the street grid.

Rather than using easily-available aggregate data collected at city ward levels
to make inferences about past urban geographies, this work has combined
city directories and period advertisements with census records to reconstruct
digitally the historical address systems of cities and geolocate every possible
family in the 1860 census for the cities of Washington, D.C., Nashville,
Tennessee, and, for the 1870 census, the city of Omaha, Nebraska (additional
cities will be added as the project expands). Notably, Donald DeBats and Mark
Lethbridge had pioneered a similarly intensive approach for the much smaller
cities of Newport, Kentucky and Alexandria, Virginia (DeBats and
Lethbridge 2005). Because of the extensive details collected by these censuses,
these geolocated individuals provide rich new datasets for historical
researchers to explore. By geolocating individuals, this research also
highlights specific individual living situations and helps to complement known
(and more easily accessible) anecdotal accounts from common primary sources
such as journals and letters.

Placing Segregation is the primary result of this research effort - a new, open
access digital project at the University of Iowa Libraries' Digital Scholarship
and Publishing Studio that explores research questions about housing
segregation and socioeconomic disparities across nineteenth century American
cities through a series of fully interactive maps and scholarly interpretations
derived from the geolocated census data. This presentation introduces core
functionality of the digital exhibit and also explains in detail the process of
developing the data and the website.

Built primarily upon Leaflet.js, an open-source JavaScript library for mobile
friendly interactive maps, as well as other openly available JavaScript
libraries such as Fuse.js, this digital map exhibit gives public audiences
direct access to detailed census data for the years 1860 and 1870 in these
select U.S. cities. A search feature allows visitors to quickly locate the
historical residences of persons of interest and read complete census
information about them, while a number of simple layer filters permit users to
explore potentially infinite topics by giving them direct control over the
geographic data. The primary digital exhibit gives audiences without GIS
experience the power to ask research questions in a spatial environment.

Initial research findings from the project indicate that urban historians have
been substantially underestimating the degree of housing
segregation experienced by free black residents, even though some past research
built on ward-level analyses closely approximated the extent of housing
segregation

between the native white population and various immigrant groups. The data
generated for this project illustrate American cities were in fact
significantly divided according to social class and wealth, long before the
rise of the automobile. However, residents were less divided by wealth
differences than they were separated spatially by skin color in Washington D.C.
or by German and Irish origin in Nashville and Omaha.

