Quotidian Reading: Digitally Mapping Literary and Personal Geographies

Tom Keegan

thomas-keegan@uiowa.edu

University of Iowa, United States of America

Sarah Bond

sarah-bond@uiowa.edu

University of Iowa, United States of America

Students (and some teachers) feel rightly intimidated by Petronius’ Satyricon
or James Joyce’s Ulysses.

They are big books that are too often cast as things to

be conquered or “done”— as in “ I did Ulysses”—rather than encountered as
portals to better understanding ourselves and the world in which we live. In
the face of literary complexity and historical heft, students and instructors
experience an anxiety of knowing. They feel expected to master a text rather
than adapt it to their own needs or desires. In this long paper, we (Professors
Sarah Bond and Tom Keegan) offer an alternate approach to reading texts in
which the experiential learning advocated for by John Dewey (and often averred
by literary theorists) is combined with a host of digital mapping tools,
broadly understood. We describe our work in two courses—one in Classics and one
in English—as aimed at connecting the content of Petronius’ and Joyce’s novels
with the daily lives of our students. In our courses students undertook a
kind of “quotidian reading” in which they identified spaces and practices in
the novels and relocated those elements in their own lives, sharing their
observations through mapping, blogging, and podcasting. The resulting
coursework reversed the emphasis on knowing the text as thing, and placed it,
instead, on knowing the text as a mode of self-understanding. Given
both Joyce’s and Petronius’ preoccupation with space and geography, we invited
students to map their own daily travels, applying the text as epically or
mundanely as they saw fit. We were interested in how students came to see the
text as relevant to them as everyday people.

This student-driven cartography in which real spaces are interpreted alongside
“imaginary” spaces via digital means encourages humanities students to close
the gap between what they are reading and what they are living. Quotidian
reading has the potential to refigure all types of textual spaces—from the 
Aeneid's description of the underworld to Dante’s description of it over a
millennium later—by inviting students to annotate and augment their spatial
dynamics with textual references—and vice versa. In this paper, we lay out a
set of best practices, digital methods, and core approaches to allowing
students to thread the “imagined spaces” of the text into the daily spaces of
our students’ lives. Digital tools offer intriguing possibilities for reframing
the stoic and epicurean spaces embedded in the Satyricon or resituating the
daily environments and existential perspectives of Ulysses' Bloom, Stephen, and
Molly. As our students mapping (among other things) the use, disuse, and misuse
of public spaces in Iowa City, they approach a new understanding of Petronius’
satirical spaces or Joyce’s novel articulation of the public sphere. Through
the use of the open-source tool “ImageMapster,” which uses HTML5 canvases
rather than Java in order to work in modern browsers, students represent,
annotate, layer, and ultimately archive these literary topographies. The
process allows students to engage in memoir through the geographic medium of
the map and to remediate their experience of their daily life—in much the same
way that Petronius and Joyce did. One result, has been the creation of personal
“base maps” for the literary texts as constructed by our students. This product
of the pedagogical enterprise suggests a new approach for commonly taught
literary texts in other courses. Standards for the mapping of literary
geographies as personal geographies are virtually non-existent, though they are
a means for both engagement and reflection.

In some ways, this paper moves the application of GPS beyond Bill Clinton’s
1996 desire to “encourage acceptance and integration of GPS into peaceful
civil, commercial and scientific applications worldwide.” That broad public
intent, combined with the pedagogical legacy of the “spatial turn” in
literature, history, and art, has yielded a growing interest in digital
humanities projects that make use of mapping as a tool of self-discovery. The
pedagogical approach detailed in this paper expands on spatial turn’s address
of the “microcosms of everyday life and the macrocosms of global flows.” And
while cartography provides the ability to relate points spatially as they exist
on the Earth’s surface, literature often deviates from the physical geometries
denoted through longitude, latitude, and elevations coordinates. Through a
quotidian

reading, the spatial structure and topographical features found within novels
such as Petronius’ Satyricon or James Joyce's Ulysses help students organize,
access, and navigate literary texts and themselves in daily life. The frequent
tensions between the “real” and the “imaginary” geographies of a text and of
our everyday lives can—when reflected upon—serve to unveil to students the
emotions, perceptions, and motives of a character or author. This paper, we
hope, will invite thoughtful conversation about the nature of the
digital humanities in and beyond the classroom, as students are encouraged to
see digital tools as ones they can use in everyday life.

