Access(ed) Poetry. The Graph Poem Project and the Place of Poetry in
Digital Humanities

Chris Tanasescu (MARGENTO)

margento.official@gmail.com

University of Ottawa, Canada

Diana Inkpen

diana.inkpen@uottawa.ca

University of Ottawa, Canada

Vaibhav Kesarwani

vaibhavkw84@gmail.com

University of Ottawa, Canada

Bryan Paget

bdjpaget@gmail.com

University of Ottawa, Canada

The Graph Poem Project at University of Ottawa develops tools for poetry
computational analysis and applies graph theory and network graph computational
apps in structuring, analyzing, and visualizing poetic corpora. The concept
involves generating network graphs (multigraphs) in which the vertices are
poems and the edges represent various commonalities between poems in terms of
subject, diction, form, style, and other criteria. By computationally analyzing
the network graph certain extremely interesting and potentially useful
information can be extracted regarding a specific corpus. For instance, by
identifying cut vertices, we find out which poem(s) play a crucial role in the
connectivity of the network and therefore also in the cohesion of the corpus,
since by removing that particular poem-node the whole network becomes
disconnected, and thus the corpus per se without that particular poem would
become disarticulate and divided; and similarly, cut edges signal connections
between certain poems that are of paramount importance in the connectivity of
the entire network. Identifying cliques of nodes, on the other hand, for
instance, shows how poems within a corpus are clustered and which parts of a
specific oeuvre, collection, or anthology are more self-contained than others
or which poems belong together across or within divides such as authorship,
school, period or region, etc. More generally, representing corpora as network
multigraphs makes possible analyzing and visualizing both small and
significantly large datasets (so far up to hundreds of thousands) of poems, and
reach certain information and conclusions about both particular poems in that
corpus and the corpus as a whole or as compared to other corpora.

This is one of the first respects in which the issue of access becomes of
dramatic importance for our research and for developing and testing our tools;
and virtually for any contemporary digital project in poetry. Namely the access
to databases and the ability to convert existing files into formats that are
compatible to computational processing and analysis. The paper will focus on
the existing databases, will review previous work in the field and analyze the
kind of data they have employed, will examine the premises and prospects for
big data and/or data intensive research in poetry (one of the main tenets of
our project), and the arguable absence of such approaches in the
published research in the area so far. Terms like “crawl” and “rip” for the
poetry available online, and issues related to digitization and/or
computationally analyzing poetry in print will also be placed under close
scrutiny while we will also report on our own solutions and results, and
compare them to those in other projects in digital humanities (DH), digital
literary studies, or computational linguistics/analysis.

Our research, tools, publications, and future work will therefore be then
presented in a comparative manner in the wider context of current trends,
theories, and debates in DH in general and text analysis in particular—by
considering for instance the potential relevance of the Graph Poem Project to
at least some of the issues raised in the “Forum: Text Analysis at
Scale” section of Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016 (eds.

Lauren F. Klein and Matthew K. Gold), or literature-related tools/projects such
as Syuzhet or heureCLEA—, in natural language processing (NLP)—by
reviewing other projects that have dealt with literary computational analysis
and particular poetry processing, but also other works that focused on various
issues in computational linguistics, such as syntax or trope processing and
analysis—, and in digital pedagogy, by relating it to other poetry related
digital pedagogical projects (such as those reviewed by Chuck Rybak, for

instance, in Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities). “Access” therefore will turn
out to encompass quite a few different meanings and phenomena. In terms of
text and data analysis, we will review existing debates and commentaries and
contribute our own on the politics of developing poetry archives or assembling
collec-tions/anthologies, and the related issues of represen-tationality,
especially with regards to gender, race, minority, and so forth. In other
words, the question asked will be, what is the access of certain authors
and their works to our research and tools, what are their chances to be
represented in the graph poem? Then, in terms of existing tools, accessibility
refers to either the monetary aspects of acquiring or upgrading certain apps or
to accessing the source code and/or repurposing it, and the discussion will
gravitate around the political and cultural implications of such
options. Access then also means accessibility of our tools to the user, in the
sense of how easy or how complicated it is for ‘anybody' to read our approach,
use our apps, and employ our results; and why would they ever do it?— how are
we trying to ‘seduce' our audience? The paper will hence examine what are the
“compromises” we have made in that respect—as for instance in picking 2 or 3
dimensions as rhyme sub-types in employing a certain API for displaying rhyme
scores as scatter graphs—, and what are the actual efforts we are making in
conveying the potential significance of sometimes arcane mathematical theories
and algorithms for poetry. But on yet another level, access means success,
namely the measure of our project's access to levels of meaning (in Adrian
Liu's terms and not only) that may be deemed as ‘deeply' or ‘typically' poetic,
an analysis that will combine notions of genre or craft related subtlety with
pragmatic computational concerns, such as operationally consolidating numeric
and nonnumeric features and commonalities.

A more prosaic question to address will then be what is the access poetry
really has to DH-related research, interest, and funding. Again, the data
related to our own project will be compared to others, and the analysis will
focus on the place of poetry in significant DH publications, periodicals, and
platforms.

