Computer Vision in Digital Humanities

Martijn Kleppe

martijn.kleppe@kb.nl

National Library of the Netherlands, the Netherlands

Matthew Lincoln

mlincoln@getty.edu

Getty Research Institute, United States of America

Melvin Wevers

m.j.h.f.wevers@uu.nl

Utrecht University, the Netherlands

Mark Williams

mark.j.williams@dartmouth.edu

Dartmouth College, United States of America

Benoit Seguin

benoit.seguin@epfl.ch

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

Thomas Smits

t.smits@let.ru.nl

Raboud University, the Netherlands

Introduction

Although the majority of Digital Humanities scholars still focus on textual
analysis, we see an increasing number of studies using digitised visual sources
and taking the first steps in the field of ‘Visual Big Data' (Ordelman et al,
2014). Scholars have increasingly used both large-scale digitised visual
datasets as well as computational methods to analyse these datasets in new
ways, see for example the work of Lev Manovich on Manga comics (2012), Time
covers, and selfies (Ma-novich & Tifentale 2015) or the recent work of Le-nardo
et al (2016) on visual pattern discovery in large databases of paintings as
presented at the DH 2016 conference. Others focus on the identification of
finding recurring images in visual collections. Terras & Kirton (2013) analyse
the reuse of digital images of cultural and heritage material on the internet
while Resig (2014) and Reside (2015) follow a similar approach using a closed
dataset.

A similar trend can be observed at the ADHO Digital Humanities Conferences. In
2014 the special Interest group Audiovisual Materials in Digital Humanities
was founded and at the 2015 and 2016 conferences, several papers were presented
using (audio) visual sources (see e.g. Kleppe 2015, Lenardo et al. 2016,
Lincoln 2016). Based on an analysis of the submissions for the 2017 conference,
Scott Weingart observes that an increasing number of papers are based on
research concerning non-textual sources (Weingart 2017). The use of non-textual
sources challenges established research practices of Digital Humanities,
leading to new research questions and the need for transformation of existing
approaches, and the development of new methodologies. For example, how can we
analyse the characteristics of images in large visual datasets? Some of these
questions have also been raised in the analogue era. See, for example, the work
of Barry Salt (1974) on the characteristics of opening shots of
twentieth-century films, Scott McCloud (1994) on the visual language of
Japanese manga and comics, or Peter Burke's take on using visual materials as
historical evidence (2001).

Due to the digital turn, we now see the application of new techniques to answer
similar and new types of research questions. One of the dominant techniques
to analyse large-scale visual datasets is computer vision: a field that deals
with how computers can generate a high-level of understanding of visual
material (Smeulders 2000).This field has been seeing unprecedented improvements
as part of the “Deep Learning Revolution” since the first deep Convolutional
Neural Network (Krizhevsky 2012), unleashing new possibilities. This workshop
will focus on how computer vision can be applied within the realm of
Audiovisual Materials in Digital Humanities. During the workshop, attendees
will both present (ongoing) work on applying computer vision and experiment
with computer vision in their own work in a hands-on session.
Possible questions include:

• What are state-of-art techniques in computer vision?

• What are possibilities and challenges in the application of computer vision
in Digital Humanities research?

• How can non-expert researchers employ computer vision?

• How can cooperation between Humanities researchers and computer vision
experts be improved so both can benefit of each other's expertise?

Workshop outline

The workshop will consist of four pillars:

•    A keynote by Lindsay King (Associate Director for Access and Research
Services Robert B. Haas Family Arts Library, Yale University)

& Peter Leonard (Director Digital Humanities Lab, Yale University Library) & on
“Processing Pixels: Towards Visual Culture Computation”

•    Paper presentations with results and ongoing work on applying computer
vision in DH research projects. Papers will be selected by a review commission.
All details on the Call for Abstracts can be found at the workshop website.

•    A hands-on session in which participants will be able to experiment with
open source Computer Vision tools. This session will be led by Benoit Seguin of
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, (EPFL). Benoit Seguin is a PhD
Student in Computer Science from the DHLAB at EPFL. His work focuses on
automatic patterns detection across icon-ographic collections. Before starting
his PhD, he worked with microscope images for biomedical applications or
electronic manufacturing problems.

•    Lightning Talks allowing participants to share their ideas, projects or
ongoing work in a short presentation of two minutes. Interested researchers who
want to present work will be able to submit their idea in a later stage.

SIG Endorsement

This workshop proposal is endorsed by the steering committee of the Special
Interest Group Audiovisual Materials in the Digital Humanities (AVinDH). This
will be the third workshop that will be organised by the SIG. The first
workshop on audiovisual material in digital humanities took place at the 2014
DH Conference in Lausanne. This workshop paved the way for the foundation of
the AVinDH Special Interest Group that was officially launched during the
DH2015 Conference in Sydney. The second workshop took place during the DH2016
Conference in Cracow and dealt with audiovisual material and dedicated analysis
tools in DH.

While the previous SIG-endorsed workshops were organised by the SIG's steering
committee, this proposal on Computer Vision in Digital Humanities is mainly
organised by members of the SIG and one representative of the Steering
Committee. The steering committee applauds the initiative of the
organisers since the theme of the workshop fits perfect in both

the SIG's aims as well as the current interest in nontextual sources as
observed by Scott Weingart in his first analyses of the DH2017 submissions.
Furthermore, the steering committee is enthusiastic about providing a platform
for members of the SIG and the complete DH community to present high-quality
work that will be selected by a review committee as well as ongoing work that
will be presented in lighting talks. Both formats will contribute to the
community and network building function that the SIG AVinDH promotes.

Programme Committee

The programme committee (PC) for this workshop consists of the workshop
proposers (see list with names and bios below). For the paper selection
process, the PC will be extended with at least 10 experts. The selection
process will be chaired by Prof. Fran-ciska de Jong, Utrecht University/CLARIN
ERIC and chair of the SIG's Steering Committee (f.m.g.dejong@uu.nl)

Composition of the Programme Committee (workshop proposers only)

Dr. Martijn Kleppe

Martijn Kleppe is a researcher at the Research Department of the National
Library of the Netherlands (KB) where he works on several Digital
Humanities Projects as part of the KB’s Digital Humanities Team. Before he
worked as academic researcher at the Erasmus University Rotterdam and Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam. He wrote his dissertation on ‘Canonical Iconic
Photographs’ and was involved in several Digital Humanities projects focussing
on opening up (au-dio)visual archives.

Melvin Wevers

Melvin Wevers is in the final stage of his PhD research at Utrecht University
on the role of the United States as a reference culture in
twentieth-century Dutch newspaper debates on consumer goods. In his research,
he primarily focuses on text analysis but he is moving in the direction of
computational analyses of visual materials. He also worked on the eScience
project ShiCo: Shifting Concepts Over Time in which he used word embeddings to
study conceptual change in large historical corpora. In Spring 2016, he was a
research fellow of the ‘culture analytics' program hosted by the UCLA's
Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics. In March 2017, he will be
researcher-in-residence at the National Library of the Netherlands (KB) to work
on the computational analyses of images in newspaper advertisement.

Mark Williams

Mark Williams is Associate Professor of Film and Media Studies at Dartmouth
College. He received both of his graduate degrees in Critical Studies from
The School of Cinema-Television at The University of Southern California. He
has published in a variety of journals and anthologies, including Télévision:
le moment expérimental (1935-1955); Convergence Media History; New Media:
Theories and Practices of Digitex-tuality; Collecting Visible Evidence;
Dietrich Icon; Television, History, and American Culture: Feminist Critical
Essays; and In Living Color: Race, Feminism, and

Television. He directed the Leslie Center Humanities

Institute entitled Cyber-Disciplinarity. In conjunction with the Dartmouth
College Library, he is the founding editor of an e-journal, The Journal of
e-Media Studies. With Adrian Randolph, he co-edits the book series Interfaces:
Studies in Visual Culture for the University Press of New England. With Michael
Casey, he received an NEH Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant to build the ACTION
toolset for cinema analysis. He received an award for Scholarly Innovation and
Advancement at Dartmouth for directing The Media Ecology Project (MEP). He has
published about MEP in The Arclight Guidebook to Media History and The Digital
Humani

ties (2016), and also in The Moving Image (2016). Most recently Williams has
received with John Bell (MEP architect) an NEH grant to build a Semantic
Annotation Tool (SAT). With Lorenzo Torresani (Dartmouth Computer Studies) he
has received a Knight Foundation grant to develop computer vision and machine
learning capacities for moving images.

Thomas Smts

Thomas Smits is completing a PhD on the transnational trade in illustrations of
the news and the production of identity by mid-nineteenth century European
illustrated newspapers at the Radboud University in the Netherlands. He is an
editor of the Journal for European Periodicals Research (JEPS) and a PhD-board
member of the Royal Netherlands Historical Society. In May 2017 he will start a
researcher-in-residence project at the National Library of the Netherlands (KB)
entitled Illustrations to Photographs: using computer vision to analyse news
pictures in Dutch newspapers, 1860-1940.

Benoit Seguin

Benoit Seguin is a PhD student at the Digital Humanities Laboratory of EPFL.
His work focuses on using modern computer vision algorithms to navigate large
iconographic collections, and he recently showed how Neural Networks could be
trained to recognize similar patterns in different artworks. He is part of
the bigger REPLICA project which aims at digitizing and making searchable the
1M photos of the Cini collection in Venice. He took part of the organization of
the recent “New Methods and Technologies for Art History” Summer School between
ETHZ and EPFL. Before starting his PhD, he got his MSc in Computer Science with
a thesis about SEM Image Analysis from IBM Research Zurich.

Matthew Lincoln

Matthew Lincoln (Ph.D. University of Maryland 2016) is a Data Research
Specialist with the Getty Research Institute, working on the Provenance Index
Remodeling Project. He specializes in computationally-driven analysis of art
history, including complex network analysis and machine learning methods on
cultural datasets. He has previously worked as a curatorial fellow with the
National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, and has received grants from both
the Getty and Kress Foundations as part of digital art history summer
institutes, and in 2016 was an organizer for a jointly-funded conference
“Digital Dimensions of Art History” hosted by the University of Maryland and
the Maryland Institute for Technology and Humanities. He has published
data-driven research articles in the International Journal of Digital Art
History and British Art Studies, and is a contributor to The Programming
Historian.

Target audience

This workshop aims to bring together scholars from different fields who have an
interest in or actively use computer vision to analyse (large) datasets of
digitised audiovisual sources. We have a wide network of peers that can be
reached, and will also scan the papers of the conference that have been
selected with the aim to invite potential contributors in this

realm to present their work in our workshop. We aim

at participation of 20 - 30 persons.

