Brief outline

XQuery for Digital

Humanists

Joseph Wicentowski

joewiz@gmail.com

Office of the Historian, U.S. Department of State United States of America

Clifford Anderson

clifford.anderson@vanderbilt.edu

author.email@domain.com

Vanderbilt University, United States of America

Introduction

This half-day tutorial introduces digital humanists at any level of experience
to XQuery, a mature, high-level programming language used in many DH
projects because it is purpose-built for analyzing, manipulating, and
publishing data stored in the XML-based data formats that many DH projects use,
e.g., TEI, EAD,

MODS, METS. Prominent XQuery-based projects inelude Carl Maria von Weber
Gesamtausgabe, Foreign Relations of the United States and Syriaca.org.

Led by two experts who each have a decade of experience using and teaching
XQuery and who have coauthored XQuery for Humanists (forthcoming, Texas A&M
University Press), this half-day tutorial introduces the key concepts
underlying the XQuery language and the kinds of analysis that it makes
possible. The focus will be on exploring TEI-encoded editions with simple
XQuery expressions.

Using a free and easy to install XQuery learning environment, participants (who
must bring their own laptops) will gain hands-on experience writing
queries against open datasets, including a TEI-encoded documentary edition, 
Foreign Relations of the United States. Participants will gain a basic
foundation in the language and be introduced to community resources for further
study.

This half-day workshop will cover the basics of XQuery, providing participants
with sufficient hands-on experience to start exploring their own
scholarly editions and metadata with XQuery. We presuppose that participants
will have come with a basic understanding of XML and TEI.

I. Introduction: XQuery for the Digital Humanities

II. Setting up an XQuery environment

III.    Finding data with XPath

IV.    Writing FLWOR expressions

V.    Exploring XQuery Full-Text

Each section (except the introduction) will include hands-on exercises.

Target audience:

Students, scholars, and practitioners who use or are interested in using
digital methods in their humanities work in academic departments, libraries,
"alt-ac" fields, or their private capacity; no previous programming experience
required; some experience XML or an XML-based format (TEI, EAD, MODS, METS)
useful but not required. Participants will work with a common dataset provided
by the tutorial leaders, but they may bring their own datasets for practice
during the lab and consultation period.

Tutorial leaders

Clifford B. Anderson is Associate University Librarian for Research and
Learning at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. He has a M.Div. from
Harvard Divinity School and a Th.M. and Ph.D. from Princeton Theological
Seminary. He also holds a M.S. in Library and Information Science from the
Pratt Institute in New York City. Cliff started working with XQuery in 2006
before the first official version of the language was released. In 2014, he
served as the project leader of the NEH-funded XQuery Summer Institute at
Vanderbilt University. He has also taught sessions on XQuery for iterations of
Laura Mandel's Programming for Humanists course at Texas A&M and leads
the weekly XQuery working group at Vanderbilt University for digital humanists

Joseph C. Wicentowski is the Digital History Advisor in the Office of the
Historian at the U.S. Department of State. He received his Ph.D. from Harvard
University in modern East Asian history. He started using XQuery in 2007 to
analyze and publish the Office of the Historian's TEI-encoded publications and
datasets. For more on the project, see Wicentowski (2011). All code and data
from the project are freely available on GitHub. He recognized XQuery's
potential to empower students, scholars, and practitioners to take control
of their own data and build their own applications. But he knew that without
resources geared toward people with a humanities background, others would
struggle

as he first did. He began writing about XQuery in various digital humanities
forums, contributing to the XQuery Wikibook online textbook, and giving
workshops at the TEI@Oxford and Digital Humanities@Ox-ford Summer School
programs. Joe regularly speaks and writes in the fields of history, documentary
editing, and open government. He also actively participates in TEI, XQuery, and
digital humanities communities, and fosters discussion about XQuery on Twitter
at

@XQuery.

