Untangling the Social Network of Musicians

Stefan Janicke

stjaenicke@informatik.uni-leipzig.de Leipzig University, Germany

JosefFocht

josef.focht@uni-leipzig.de

Leipzig University, Germany

Introduction

As opposed to the former idea of creative autonomy, in recent years, humanities
research tends to investigate cultural contexts and circumstances,
inspirational models, and the ways that knowledge, experience and expertise
have been transferred over time. We address the question of "creative transfer"
within the field of music. Due to the everlasting significance

of musical works, relationships between musicians -the entry point for such an
investigation - are well documented in archives, libraries and museums. In
print media, usually only a single relation between two musicians is narrated.
Furthermore, it is common for the biography of only one of the two musicians to
report on the relationship. Larger overviews of social networks between several
musicians seldom exist. Although some digital resources exist, these are often
reduced to the milieux of popular musicians like Mozart and Beethoven.

Since 2005, musicologists of the project Bavarian Musicians Encyclopedia Online
(Bayerisches Musiker Lexikon Online, BMLO) have systematically
collected biographical data (an example is given in Figure 1) and examined
relationships between musicians from print media - a tedious work that results
in a unique database of great value for musicology. The BMLO contains musicians
from all kinds of musical professions (e.g., composers, singers, musicologists,
instrument makers, ...), most of whom had an active lifetime period living in
Bavaria or a considerable influence on Bavaria. Now providing information about
around 28,000 musicians, the BMLO has achieved global scope, one that is
underpinned by the many musicologists worldwide who use the BMLO for their
daily work.

[002-1]


Schumann, Robert (Robert Alexander)

* 8. Juni 1810 Zwickau, t 29. Juli 1856 Bonn Geschlecht männlich

Konfess i o n evangel isch-lutherisch Beziehungen

Schumann, Clara (1819-1896), Pianistin

Wieck, Friedrich (1785-1873), Musikpädagoge Schüler

Nottebohm, Martin Gustav (1817-1882), Musikforscher Wasielewski, Wilhelm Joseph
von (1822-1896), Musikforscher

Kollegen

Hauptmann, Moritz (1792-1868), Geiger Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Felix (1809-1847),
Komponist

Panofka, Heinrich (1807-1887), Gesangslehrer Chopin, Frédéric (1810-1849),
Komponist Joachim, Joseph (1831-1907), Geiger Brahms, Johannes (1833-1897),
Komponist

Musikalische Berufe Pianist, Komponist Weitere Tätigkeiten Journalist,
Jurist Träger/Sparte Medien

Wirkungsortc Bayreuth, Berlin, Bonn, Colditz, Dresden, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt/
Main, Hamburg, Heidelberg, Karlsbad, Köln, Kreischa, Leipzig, Mailand, Maxen,
Moskau, München, St. Petersburg, Wien, Zwickau

Figure 1: Biographical information about Robert Schumann

in the BMLO. Alongside information about a musician's lifetime, denomination,
professions or places of activity, the database provides a number of
relationships by type. Next to his partner Clara Schumann, further relations
are listed to Robert Schumann's father in law, to his students, colleagues,
and other acquainted musicians in his social network

In earlier works, we developed visual interfaces on the basis of the BMLO data
for profiling musicians (Jä-nicke et al, 2016), and for the distant reading of
musicians' biographies (Khulusi et al, 2016). However, the social network
inherent in the BMLO has remained untouched so far. Using the BMLO, only the
social network of single musicians can be observed, as is the case when using
print media. In order to facilitate an extensive analysis of the entire social
network concealed in the BMLO, we designed a visualization that brings together
all of the relationships in the form of an interactive social network graph. In
contrast to previous means of investigating the transfer of musical knowledge,
we allow for the dynamic exploration of relationships among musicians over
generations.

Graph Topology

Information regarding relationships to other musicians in the database is
provided for 9,805 musicians of the BMLO. Only one relation exists for
around 46,5% of these musicians, and just 261 musicians have ten or more
relations. Adolf Wilhelm August Sandberger is the musician with most relations
(97). The average number of relations for musicians is 2.6. The resultant graph
structure of the social network consists of 1,420 connected components, the
largest component connects 5,539 musicians, the second largest only 56
musicians - 1,385 connected components contain less than ten musicians.

Due to the above mentioned topological features of the graph, the typical,
straightforward visualization using a force-directed layout approach, e.g., by
using tools such as Gephi (Bastian, 2009), leads to a global overview of the
social network (see Figure 2). However, local structures are hardly readable,
which makes an interactive exploration nearly impossible. The objective of this
work was to develop a graph design that makes the social network of musicians
visually accessible for the first time, and, moreover, capable of being
explored in accordance with the research questions of the collaborating
musicologists. We focused on the largest connected component that causes the
greatest challenges for this task.

[002-2]

Figure 2: The largest connected component with 5,539 musicians visualized using
Gephi.


Graph & Interface Design to Analyze Teacher-Student Relationships

The preliminary step when generating the social network graph is filtering
according to the underlying research question. At first, a filtering can be
done by relationship type(s). Second, it is possible to focus exclusively on
musicians with specific professions (e.g., instrumentalists). In the following
discussion, we focus on the motivating example for this work: the analysis of
teacher-student relationships to investigate how musical knowledge, experience
and expertise have been transferred over time. The corresponding filter keeps
3,994 musicians, the largest connected component of this sub-network - the
research object of the musicologists - contains 2,769 teachers and students.
The Gephi output for this graph is given in Figure 3.

[002-3]

Figure 3: The largest connected component of the teacher-student network with
2,769 musicians visualized using Gephi.


Although the structures are slightly finer due to the reduced number of nodes
and edges, the highly connected part in the interior of the graph remains
cluttered. Here, we list our design decisions applied in order to generate a
readable graph (see Figure 4) and a navigable interface.

[002-4]

Figure 4: The largest connected component of the teacher-student network with
2,769 musicians (608 nodes) visualized with our method.

• Temporally aligned graph: It was particularly important for the musicologists
that the graph layout includes a temporal dimension, so that relations can be
chronologically analyzed from left-to-right. Therefore, we applied a
force-directed graph layout and used fixed x-values that represent a
time-stamp,

which reflects the middle of a musician's creative lifetime (see Janicke 2016),
on a horizontal time axis. As a result, the nodes only spread vertically and
the chronological order remains intact.

•    Node grouping: Because the underlying research question investigates
transfer paths of musical knowledge, we hide the nodes of musicians who never
had the role of a teacher. Still, these musicians are grouped to their
teachers, and can be accessed in the exploration process. This design decision
reduces the number of nodes to be displayed from 2,769 to 608.

•    Node layout: To illustrate the significance and the influence of
personalities, the sizes of nodes reflect the number of students of the
corresponding teachers, which makes teachers with many students salient. Per
default, node labels are hidden, but for navigation purposes, a user-defined
number of node labels with the corresponding musicians names can be shown on
demand. Either the most popular musicians or the teachers with most students
can be highlighted.

•    Interactivity: Hovering over a node shows the corresponding musician and
two lists of students (those who became teachers and those who did not) in a
popup box. Clicking a node highlights all connections to a teacher's students
who became themselves teachers. This way, transfer paths of musical knowledge
can be assembled interactively.

•    Musical profession analysis: For the selected (via mouse click) musicians
in the graph, the evolution of musical professions can be analyzed. Therefore,
all musical professions of the teachers' students are listed by decreasing
frequency. For each profession, a bar chart illustrates when they have been
pursued.

Analysis of Teacher-Student Relationships

This section outlines a usage scenario of the teacher-student network taking
the example of Adolf Wilhelm August Sandberger who established musicology as a
subject of study in Munich.

First, we compare Sandberger to one of his teachers, Joseph Rheinberger, both
being the teachers with the highest numbers of students (the BMLO lists
97 students for Sandberger and 87 students for Rheinberger). Of special
interest was the comparative analysis of the musical professions of their
students in order to assess the similarity of both teachers' studentries.
Figure 5 shows the two selected teachers in the social network, and a view at
the summarized musical professions of their students is given. While
composition was the major musical profession of Rheinbergers students (70x),
this number drops for Sandbergers

students (52x). On the other hand, the number of musicologists increase (10x
   65x). Other significant

changes can be seen for the professions choirmaster (29x    9x), organist
(19x    8x), music writer (12x

29x) and music editor (5x    26x). Thus, the visualiza

tion reflects a change of the musical profile of both studentries from
composition to composition science- a hypothesis that could be verified with
our system.

Second, we examined the change of teaching since Sandberger established
musicology in Munich. Therefore, we observed the musical professions of the
students of Sandberger and his successors in Munich, Rudolf von Ficker,
Thrasybulos Georgios Georgiades and Theodor Göllner (see Fig. 6). While the
musicologist is the most frequent taught musical profession, the composer gets
less and less important. The last teacher Theodor Göllner even had no student
with the composer as musical profession. Thus, the change from composition to
composition science that already started with Sandberger compared to
Rheinberger, steadily continued with Sandberger's successors.

[002-5]

Figure 5: Comparing the students of Joseph Rheinberger and Adolf Wilhelm August
Sandberger.

[002-6]

Figure 6: Temporal change of teaching in Munich.

Conclusion

Through close collaboration with computer scientists and musicologists
implementing a user-centered design approach, we developed a visualization that
allows for the dynamic, interactive exploration of the social network of
musicians, focusing primarily on teacher-student relationships. In contrast to
out-of-the-box tools like Gephi, we took the research questions of the
collaborating musicologists into account when designing the graph and the user
interface. Although detailed information about individual relation periods
between musicians as well as the taught musical professions are not included in
the underlying database, the provided interface facilitates a novel view on the
social network of musicians, which allows to draw conclusions on the question
of the transfer of musical knowledge.

The value of our system for users of the BMLO is not only that social networks
are visualized for the first time, but also that the graph may be filtered in
accordance with the way that specific research questions can be investigated.
Next to teacher-student relationships, familial or labor relationships also
create valuable networks to be explored. Furthermore, it is possible to analyze
sub-networks concerning musical professions, and to combine relationship types
with musical professions. For example, when combining teacher-student
relationships with the musical profession instrumentalist (see Fig. 7),
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart shows up at the beginning of the instrument
playing knowledge transfer.

[002-7]

Figure 7: Teaching instrumentalists.

