The Seven Words of the Virgin: Identifying change in the discourse context
of the concept of virginity in Early Modern English

Susan Fitzmaurice

s.fitzmaurice@sheffield.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Justyna Robinson

justyna.robinson@sussex.ac.uk

University of Sussex

Iona Hine

i.hine@sheffield.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Fraser Dallachy

fraser.dallachy@glasgow.ac.uk.

University of Glasgow

Kathryn Rogers

k.m.rogers@sheffield.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Marc Alexander

marc.alexander@glasgow.ac.uk

University of Glasgow

Michael Pidd

m.pidd@sheffield.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Seth Mehl

seth.mehl.10@ucl.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Matthew Groves

m.i.groves@sheffield.ac.uk

University of Sheffield

Brian Aitken

brianaAitken@glasgow.ac.uk

University of Glasgow

Introduction

The Linguistic DNA project (LDNA) is an AHRC-funded collaborative project (AHRC
grant AH/M00614X/1) between the universities of Sheffield, Glasgow, and Sussex
which is designing automatic processes to investigate the emergence
and development of concepts in pre-1800 CE print. Employing Early English Books
Online, manually-transcribed through the Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP)
as its primary dataset, supplemented by Eighteenth Century Collections Online
(ECCO-TCP) and other high-quality 18th-century text collections, the project is
developing and refining a processing pipeline which assembles groupings of
words bound together by their contextual use in printed discourse. The project
is charting development of these discourse-embedded word groups across time,
investigating how they are shaped by historical and literary contexts, the
boundaries and overlap between the groupings, and the interaction of
‘encyclopedic' groupings with more traditional ‘thesaurus'-style semantic
fields.

This paper discusses results from a branch of the project which is
investigating incidences of rapid change in the size of semantic categories as
represented in The Historical Thesaurus of English (Kay et al., 2016).
Development of concepts through size of Thesaurus categories has been
investigated previously (cf. Alexander and Struan, 2013; Jurgen-Diller, 2014),
although the extra dimension provided by the outputs of the LDNA processor
allows a dramatic leap forward in such research by enabling identification of
instances in which change in discourse-embedded word groupings acts as catalyst
for corresponding rapid change in the semantic fields of English.

The present case study investigates words relating to the concept of
‘virginity', utilising processed time-slice subsets of EEBO-TCP as snapshots of
the discourse context for these words in Early Modern English print. By
building sample word-groupings (the term ‘cluster' is here avoided to avoid
confusion with cluster or network analysis word clusters) for each of the
subsets, it establishes the discourse context of ‘virginity' words at different
points in the timespan covered by EEBO-TCP. Comparison of these groupings
suggests change in focus of language users, through which a largely religious
context of use opens out to a secular and then a poetic literary context,
suggesting that society's consciousness of this concept and the scale on which
it was discussed enlarged dramatically in the period covered by the
sub-corpora.

Methodology

In order to select a Historical Thesaurus category for analysis, an average
pattern of change over time was established. The Thesaurus arranges the
words of the English language into a semantic hierarchy that is seven category
levels deep with the potential for up to four further sub-category levels
within any given category. Owing to the incredibly fine-grained nature of the
sense categorisation in the Thesaurus, it was necessary to ‘cut' the hierarchy
at human scale

using a thematic category set, developed during the

AHRC- and ESRC-funded SAMUELS project (Grant AH/L010062/1), which is intended
to allow Thesaurus users to find information at a level that is salient to
human beings - i.e. neither too general nor too detailed.

[016-1]

Figure 1: Sparkline showing growth of ‘Virginity' category from 1000 CE to 2000
CE in context of surrounding

thematic categories (which are themselves unusual as they are lexicalised only
in later periods of English)

The number of lexemes within each category level was counted, and lexemes were
filtered to include only those active within the approximate time range of the
EEBO-TCP collection, i.e. 1475-1700 CE. This data was aggregated so that the
change in the mean contents of a category could be viewed across time, and
decade-to-decade percentage changes calculated. Individual categories were then
compared to this average category change, and a deviation of more than 5% from
the average change considered to be significant. Out of the categories which
were marked as statistically unusual from this process, category ‘AI09g
Virginity' was selected as promising because the items in its lexis had a
relatively low number of homographs that could skew the results towards
irrelevant information.

Testing of the LDNA processor outputs is being conducted on select subsets
extracted to provide snapshots across the EEBO time-period. The subsets used
for this paper cover the periods 1520-39, 155059, 1610-11, and 1649. They are
designed to contain a similar number of tokens; the progressively contracting
timespans reflect the concomitant growth of printed material throughout the 15^
th to 17^th centuries. Each token in the text is regularised, lemma-tised, and
tagged with a NUPOS part of speech tag via the MorphAdorner pipeline developed
by Martin Müller and Philip Burns (Burns, 2013). Data is then gathered by the
LDNA processor for the token's cooccurrences within 100- and 200-word
bi-directional windows which are intended to simulate paragraph-like sections
of the proximate discourse (cf.

Fitzmaurice et al. forthcoming). Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) is used to
provide a statistic for likelihood of word co-occurrences; a minimum PMI value
of 0.5 was arrived at experimentally for identifying node-collocate pairs to be
considered interesting in initial stages of investigation.

Seven items - ‘maid,’ ‘maiden,’ ‘maidenhead,’ ‘undefiled,’ ‘vestal,’ ‘virgin,’
and ‘virginity’ - in the ‘Virginity’ category were found to be present
consistently across the subsets (although an eighth - ‘virginal’ - was present
in the 1520-39 and 1610-11 subsets). The co-occurrences were then processed to
identify those which occurred with multiple items in this list. Words which
co-occurred with four or more items were investigated further.

Results

Comparison of the co-occurrence results across the five text subsets shows a
consistent shift in the patterns of word association with ‘Virginity’ category
items. The words ‘woman’ and ‘widow’ remain strongly associated with the terms
across all the subsets, demonstrating societal preoccupation with female rather
than male virginity. The most evident change in the grouping is movement from a
predominately religious discourse context into the secular world. In the
1520-39 subset, the Virgin Mary is intimately related to discussion of
virginity. In the shared collocates listing, mother collocates with all seven
of the ‘Virginity’ lexemes, ‘mary’ with six, ‘angel,’ ‘bless,’ ‘hymn,’
‘nativity,’ and ‘nazareth’ with five each. Of these, only ‘mother’ maintains a
strong association with ‘Virginity’ words throughout the EEBO period, appearing
with four items in the 161011 text set and five in 1649.

The secularisation of the term is suggested by the prevalence in later subsets
of words relating to marriage, reflecting what appears to be a growing focus on
wedlock being preceded by virginity. ‘Marry’ gradually increases its
association with the node items, collocating with four, then five, then
seven from 1520 to 1649. ‘Marriage’ and ‘wife’ both enter the shared collocate
group in 1550, and remain there through to 1649, whilst ‘matrimony’ is present
in 1550, drops out in 1610, and returns in 1649.

The extensive list of shared collocates in the 1649 sub-corpus strongly
reflects the greater prevalence of literary fiction and poetry in printers’
output and reinforces that virginity is a topic for which the discourse context
is expanding; where it was easy to intuitively group ‘marry,’ ‘marriage,’ and
‘wife’ together, the 1649 collocates do not form easily identifiable groupings.

Discussion

The consistency of the core items found in the subsets is interesting in its
disparity with the Thesaurus data, where the increase in the number of terms
present in the ‘Virginity’ category suggests

that there should be an expanding number of items found throughout these
subsets. The most likely explanation for this is loss of low frequency
information through a combination of cut-off values intended to reduce noise
for later clustering experiments, and difficulty in normalising/lemmatising low
frequency items. A clear outcome of the analysis is the confirmation that the
category of ‘Virginity' contains core vocabulary which remains almost unchanged
in over a century (i.e. 1520-1649), primarily a consistent group of seven items
which co-occur with ‘Virginity' category words.

This study demonstrates that understanding of semantic development can be
enriched by such cross-analysis of discursive-concept word groups with 
Thesaurus semantic fields and the word groups which travel through time with
multiple items of Thesaurus categories.

