A “Wind of Change”: Shaping Public Opinion of the “Arab Spring” Using Metaphors

Alexandra Nunez

nunez@linglit.tu-darmstadt.de

Institut für Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft TU Darmstadt, Germany

Malte Gerloff

gerloff@kdsl.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de Institut für Philosophie TU Darmstadt,
Germany

Erik-Län Do Dinh

dodinh@kdsl.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de UKP Lab, TU Darmstadt, Germany

Andrea Rapp

rapp@linglit.tu-darmstadt.de

Institut für Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft TU Darmstadt, Germany

Petra Gehring

gehring@phil.tu-darmstadt.de

Institut für Philosophie, TU Darmstadt, Germany

Iryna Gurevych

gurevych@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

UKP Lab, TU Darmstadt, Germany

Motivation

How does mass media affect the way we think about controversial topics such as
the “Arab Spring”? What persuasive role do metaphors play especially in opinion
pieces?

During the events of the years 2010-2011 in the Middle East & North Africa
region a new discourse was established in the German media; immediately
these events were assessed as a “wave” of democratization and liberation, and
have been metaphorically labeled “Arab Spring”. Metaphors were frequently used
to categorize and understand these events (Möller, 2014; Nunez, 2014).

Given the premise that mass media organizes (Couldry, 2010) and shapes social
reality (Luhmann, 1996), we analyze how the Arab Spring is categorized and
assessed using metaphorical constructions in newspaper opinion pieces. We show
ways in which particularly the use of metaphors reveals how the media tried to
achieve acceptance for the events based on our cultural models (Quinn and
Holland, 1987), which are grounded on our western knowledge.

According to the Conceptual Metaphor Theory (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980)
metaphors are ubiquitous and exhibit a binary source-target domain
structure. The knowledge that we choose to function as a source domain
illustrates which conventionalized, overt or tacit knowledge we require to
understand new or abstract domains (target domains) in terms of our cultural
imprints. Metaphors are instantiated on the text surface and give us clues
toward our knowledge basis. Thus, the required knowledge can be described
in terms of ubiquitous metaphorical patterns that function as semantic
“anchors” in texts, and in terms of conceptual knowledge clusters that function
as an intertextual semantic knowledge structure.

As such, we constructed a pipeline that automatically detects metaphors
appearing within certain grammatical constructions, before clustering them
by presumed source and target domains. The results give us insights into how
the Arab Spring is metaphorically structured by semantic clusters in opinion
pieces.

Corpus and annotation

Our corpus consists of 300 opinion pieces (Ramge and Schuster, 2001) from five
German newspapers, Frankfurter Rundschau, Die Zeit, Der Spiegel, taz, and Die
Welt, which have been written between December 2010 and November 2011 and cover
the Arab Spring.

In nine of these opinion pieces, two of this abstract's authors annotated
following grammatical constructions whether they constitute metaphors:
adjective-noun (AN) pairs (e.g. “Tunisian spark”), and genitive constructions
(GEN) (e.g. “torch of freedom”). Due to their interrelated components they
provide a good

insight into the structural systematicity of metaphorical mappings (source
domain target domain). The difficulty of the task is reflected in a low
inter-annotator agreement (0.45 Krippendorff’s a).

Common sources of annotation disagreement included heavily conventionalized
metaphors such as “social network”, personifications like “self-consciousness
of a generation”, and metaphors that need a larger context to function. As gold
standard for further

training and evaluation we only use the agreed upon

annotations (“annotated”, Table 1).

Sentences AN constructions AN metaphors GEN constructions GEN metaphors

┌─────────┬─────┬─────┬─────────┬────┬────────┐
│annotated│538  │968  │116 (12%)│102 │29 (28%)│
├─────────┼─────┼─────┼─────────┼────┼────────┤
│complete │11402│19573│         │2758│        │
└─────────┴─────┴─────┴─────────┴────┴────────┘

Table 1: Constructions and metaphors in the corpus.

Technical realization

To examine our questions quantitatively, we contrast two approaches to
automatically detect metaphors, namely random forests and
multilayer-percep-tron. The extracted metaphors are subsequently clustered
(Figure 1). To extract AN and GEN constructions we first perform automatic
preprocessing, including part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing.

The random forests approach of Tsvetkov (2014) firmly roots in conceptual
metaphor theory, mainly employing features extracted from manually
crafted resources such as an abstractness wordlist and supersenses, to classify
adjective-noun and subject-verb-object constructions. For use on other
languages than English, a bilingual dictionary is required. We manually expand
an existing dictionary to cover our corpus, and extend their system to classify
GEN metaphors.

The described feature-rich approach will be compared - with regards to what
(kind of) metaphors can be found - to the shallow neural network approach by Do
Dinh and Gurevych (2016), which does not presuppose any specific metaphor
theory. It thus does not make use of external features, but rather learns
exclusively from given annotations and their context. Preliminary experiments
show that more training data is needed for this bottom-up approach.

To gain further insight into usage of metaphor in our corpus, we cluster the
automatically found metaphors - resp. their components - into
coarse-grained semantic fields. While there are works using a theory-supported
top-down approach, e.g. using source domain lists (Gordon et al., 2015), we
employ a rather unsupervised approach, without preselecting the number of
clusters or manually fixing cluster centers (similar to Shutova et al. (2010),
who use spectral clustering for metaphor detection). To that end, we employ
Affinity Propagation (Frey and Dueck, 2007), which we supply with cosine
similarities between pretrained word embeddings (Reimers et al., 2014) of
the metaphor components.

[041-1]

Figure 1: Few newspaper opinion pieces are annotated (1) and the obtained
metaphors are used to leam different models A and B (2) (Tsvetkov, 2014; Do
Dinh & Gurevych, 2016). These models are then applied to more articles to
extract metaphors (3), which are subsequently clustered (4).

Experiments and discussion

We use cross-validation for the intrinsic evaluation of the metaphor detection
part. For GEN metaphors, the tested system achieves 0.63 precision, 0.25
recall, and 0.35 F1-score, with similar performance for AN metaphors. While
these results seem low, the actual output of the system when trained on all
annotated instances looks promising, and the precision is improved by filtering
based on named entities.

Kopf: Schwertern des Islams, Köpfen des verhassten Regimes, Handlanger des
Regimes, Schlägern des Regimes, Arm des alten Regimes, Zähne eines Kamms, 
Kugeln des Regimes, Brust des Leblosen, Gesicht des Exzesses, Gesicht der EZB, 
Gesicht des Arabischen Frühlings, Gesicht arabischer Demokratien, Gesichter der
Demonstranten, Gesichter der Jasmin-Revolution, Gesicht der Revolution, Gesicht
der Muslimbruderschaft, Gesicht der ägyptischen Revolution, Gesicht des Landes,
Gesicht der tunesischen Revolution, Gesicht der USA, Gesicht ihres Sohnes, 
Gesichter der Vermissten, Fortsatz des alten Regimes, Wand der Angst, Loch der
Diktatur, Schweine des Regimes, Augen vieler Araber, Hände des
israelfeindlichen Regimes, Hand der Sozialisten, Hände des Obersten
Kommandorates, Händen der Börse

Figure 2: GEN metaphors clustered by first noun, with center “Kopf, hinting at
conceptual metaphor POLITICAL SYSTEMS ARE BODIES

The clustering creates an impression of which knowledge (source domain) is
required for abstract concepts (target domains), and how abstract concepts are
“perspectivized” in the corpus, while also giving an overview of occurring
intertextual metaphors. Although the cluster assignment and the metaphor
detection leave room for improvement (e.g. Figure 2: “face of her son”), the
clusters already reveal the systema-ticity and constraints of metaphorical
mappings. Thus, they point to strategies of newspapers that come along with the
choice of the (conceptual) source domain.

In Figure 2, bodily parts such as face, head, hand are used as source domains
and mapped to political systems or processes (e.g. regime, democracy,
revolution). This mapping draws on a long tradition in political and

philosophical history (Musolff, 2004): head and face

play a central role in our culture - comparing political processes with faces
or heads conceptualize them as human beings. In this cluster the construction 
face of indicates that the events are important, thus construed as worthy to
support.

Those prototypical examples for ontological metaphors also support the premise
of embodied cognition (Johnson, 1987; Rohrer, 2010).

Sturm: Schlussphase des alten Regimes, Sturm des arabischen Umbruchs, Sturm der
Moleküle, Sturm der Entrüstung, Inseln der Diktatur, Insel der Stabilität, Wind
der Freiheit, Wind der Demokratie, Wind der Revolution, Wind des Wandels

Figure 3: GEN metaphors clustered by first noun, with center “Sturm”, hinting
at conceptual metaphor POLITICAL SYSTEMS/PROCESSESAZALUES ARE NATURAL ELEMENTS

The positive properties and the movement character of natural elements such as 
wind and storm are mapped to the abstract (political) nouns freedom,
revolution, or change. They receive a deontic (Hermanns, 1994) character,
whereas dictatorship is conceptualized in terms of island which stands for
inertia and stability (Figure 3). These examples already show how the chosen
metaphors shape dualistic tendencies by categorizing the events on one hand as
a dynamic movement (wind, storm) that has to be supported by western
democracies, or on the other hand pleading for stability (island), thus
implicitly supporting dictatorship.

The analyzed clusters and metaphorical conceptualizations indicate a network of
source domains that function as key concepts which structure the discourse of
the Arab Spring, an assumption we will focus on in future work.

Conclusion and future work

Our study indicates that metaphorical constructions are important in media
because of their ubiquitous use in opinion pieces. The generic extracted source
domains already suggest that a specific network of knowledge is used in media
to highlight certain political aspects of the Arab Spring. Furthermore, they
illustrate how contents are emotionalized and ideologized during these events
by metaphors and their framing effects. Usage of natural elements or body parts
reduces complexity and conceptualizes the events as an organic development, in
short: the Arab states become western democratic states. Thus contributing to
the extension of western ideology, metaphors impart implicit cultural values.
Combining our cognitive and discourse analytical questions we can summarize
that the used “bottom-up” clustering is very helpful to get an explorative
impression of the “intertextual consistencies” (Verschuren, 2012: 179) of
chosen metaphors. They are good textual “anchors” and starting points to
investigate the widespread metaphorical use, and thus knowledge domains, in
corpora.

With regard to the state of the art, corpus-based methodologies within the
Digital Humanities community will benefit from our research by gaining the
possibility to automatically compare thematic corpora by using the relationship
of their metaphors to the common main cluster as a metric, therefore obtaining
a new way to analyze the conceptual network being used. Our approach can help
to facilitate corpus studies, e.g. by analyzing other discourse segments
which deal with the implicit construction of identity and alterity within
opinion pieces by using metaphors.

In our presentation we will highlight the results and give a structured
impression of the mappings and the implications of the used metaphors in our
corpus and present in short our methodological basis.

In future studies we will compare the conceptualization strategies of the Arab
Spring and “Refugee Crisis” in German media, since we assume that the same
metaphors and the same (metaphorical) interpretation patterns occur. Further,
we plan to investigate another theory of metaphor which is based on Black 
(1954, 1977) and Gehring (2010). The latter model is strongly interweaved with
current discussions about “Begriff” (Müller-Meiningen and Schmieder, 2016;
 Gehring, 2005, 2010) and discusses its ideological im-plication(s).
Furthermore, the emphasis is placed on the function of metaphors as an
epistemological tool by investigating, amongst others, the evolution of ideas
and cultural values, e.g. in the historical text collection “Natur&Staat”
(1903-11).

