Corpora and Complex

Networks as Cultural

Critique: Investigating Race and Gender Bias in Graphic Narratives

Alexander Dunst

dunset@mail.upb.de

University of Paderborn, Germany

Rita Hartel

rst@uni-paderborn.de

University of Paderborn, Germany

Introduction

This paper reports on efforts to integrate cultural critique into a DH project
that analyzes a corpus of book-length comics, or graphic narratives. We
argue that the analysis of issues such as gender, race, and class should be
central to digital scholarship that aims to become accessible to the public and
appear relevant to the humanities at large. Therefore, cultural criticism needs
to be integrated into digital projects from the very beginning. Our research
takes up calls to “design for difference” and to develop visualizations that
“enact [the] humanistic properties” of complexity and contradiction (McPherson
and Drucker, 242). Part I looks at the construction of a corpus of graphic
novels, memoirs, and non-fiction. Basing our corpus on academic databases,
international comics awards, literary histories, and online booksellers
provides insight into institutional gender and racial biases, as well as the
opportunity to address them. Part II takes up Drucker's criticism of network
analysis as reductive and static. We present networks of a pilot corpus that
pay attention to social inequality and replace reductive edges with distinct
forms of communication. Part II exemplifies our intention to make DH
scholarship relevant to a wider public. The broad appeal of comics presents an
ideal point of entry for people who might not otherwise be interested in
digital research. We apply the popular Bechdel Test (proposed by Alison Bechdel
in a comic strip but used mainly to study film and TV), to highlight the male
bias of graphic narratives.

Corpus Analysis of Institutional Gender and Racial Bias

The traditional canon of literary studies has long been criticized for its
exclusion of female, non-

Western, and minority authors. As a much younger field, comics studies lacks
the extensive canons and bibliographies produced by literary historians.
This does not mean that similar biases are absent, however. As part of a larger
project, we have built a monitor corpus of book-length comics by drawing
on sources that include academic databases (JSTOR, MLA), international comics
awards, literary and cultural histories of comics, news media coverage, and
Amazon.com (Dunst et al.). Of 220 titles included in the corpus by fall 2016,
84 per cent were written by male authors and 73 per cent were identified as
white. Biases are unevenly distributed:

Gender per Source

[047-1]

Figure 1: Gender of issue's author grouped by book's source

[047-2]

Figure 2: Ethnicity of issue's author grouped by book's source

The absence of reliable bibliographies means that the size, gender and racial
make-up of the population remains uncertain. Yet given the
considerable differences between sources, institutional biases appear likely.
To address these existing biases, two steps were undertaken. A survey sent to
comics scholars (five female, five male) asked them to suggest between five and
ten graphic narratives written by women that should be included in the corpus.
Of a total of 53 suggestions by nine respondents, nine volumes were listed by
more than one scholar and 12 had already been included in the corpus, while 14
fell outside of the sampling frame. 16 new works were added, bringing the ratio
of female author to slightly less than 22 per cent. The second step includes a
comparison of the monitor corpus and collections held at the Library
of Congress and the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library at

Ohio State University. By checking authors in these

collections against a list of names that were assigned genders by the US Social
Security Administration, we compare their gender make-ups and will
potentially add to our corpus.

Gender and Interaction Types in SemiAutomatic Networks

Network analysis has steadily grown as an area of research since Franco
Moretti's visualization of Shakespeare's Hamlet (Moretti). Scholars
have focused on automatic extraction and statistical analysis of data from
novels, plays, and intellectual networks (Elson, Dames & McKeown; van de Camp &
 van den Bosch). Recent efforts include computing main characters and
operationalizing dynamic networks (Jannidis et al; Karsdorp & van den Bosch;
 Xanthos et al). While these networks answer some of Drucker's criticism, the
approaches remain reductive. Limiting interactions to undifferentiated edges
appears particularly unsatisfying for visual media, in which communication
takes visibly different forms: characters may look at and touch each other, or
appear together in a panel. Despite recent advances, computer vision has
trouble recognizing non-perspectival drawings and applying OCR to handwritten
comics fonts remains fraught with difficulty (Dunst et al; Rigaud 2013 & 2015).
As the automatic extraction of network data is some way off for comics, we
focus on networks that are semantically enriched via manual annotation
to engage with the central questions posed by cultural studies. The following
network (Figure 3) of Karasik and Mazzuchelli's City of Glass combines
different types of interaction with gender assignations:

[047-3]

Figure 3: Interactions and gender assignations in City of Glass

These networks and the SSA name database allow us to study the relation between
authors' gender and its fictional representation. Male characters are
consistently more central to works by male authors. Notably, female characters
show higher betweenness centrality in narratives written by women, as Figure 4
shows.

Semi-Automated Bechdel-Test for GNML-Annotated Graphic Narratives

Efforts to automate the Bechdel Test have been limited to plays and film
scripts and led to poor results (Lawrence; Agarwal et al). Three
conditions need to be met to pass the test: 1. At least two female characters
appear in the story. 2. There is at least one conversation between women. 3.
The conversation is not about a man. Our XML-annotation language GNML, an
extension of John Walsh's CBML, allows for automatically checking if graphic
narratives fail


[047-4]

factorjvariable)

female

Figure 4: Centralities of character's genders by author's gender

criteria 1 and 2, and aids evaluation of whether the remaining narratives pass
criteria 3. We decided not to rely on error-prone full automation but to
use semi-automatic processes that aid human annotators/analyzers in retrieving
quality results. GNML annotations contain information on all character
occurrences, the gender of a character, and their interactions. As discussed by
Agarwal, even sophisticated machine learning approaches lead to unreliable
results in deciding whether a conversation centers on a man. Therefore,
for criteria 3, we simplify decision-making by providing the annotator with a
ranked list of dialogues, based on the number of male names or male
personal pronouns per conversation. Significantly, even if a conversation's
focus on a male character could be identified automatically, the test would
still be error-prone. Conversations may span several panels or pages and
automatic separation of these conversations remains difficult.

Conclusions and Future Research

We present corpus metadata and semantically-enriched networks of a widely
popular but understudied medium that is only beginning to attract attention by
DH researchers. These methods are used to analyze gender and racial biases
and suggest ways in which DH can appeal to scholars in cultural studies and the
wider public. Future work includes expanding pilot studies to cover our
entire corpus by integrating advances in OCR and computer vision and thus
working towards fully-automatic extraction and analysis. In the meantime,
our networks may function as conceptual models exploring how humanistic forms
of complexity can be introduced into network analysis. Analyzing and addressing
racial biases against minority authors presents hurdles of a different sort. A
repeat of our survey for minority authors appears unproblematic but assigning
racial identity to names or authors could be viewed as unethical and, given
the international nature of our corpus, would have to consider the complex
relationship of racial, national, and regional identities.

