Digital Humanities

Pedagogy in the

University of Washington Information School MLIS Program

Helene C. Williams

helenew@uw.edu

University of Washington, United States of America

Digital Humanities Librarianship is a 3-credit elective open to University of
Washington Masters of Library and Information Science students and a core
elective in the Graduate Certificate in Textual and Digital Studies program.
The course focuses on creating full contributors in the DH realm: a plethora
(in academic terms, at least) of job postings for DH or Digital Scholarship
librarians shows rapid growth in this area and a need for well-prepared
individuals. No matter the physical location of DH centers—from libraries
to academic departments to research centers—DH librarians are ideally suited
for navigating the intellectual and geographic spaces of ideas, resources,
and tools.

In addition to its unique hybrid format (synchronous residential and online),
the course is also notable for providing a balanced approach to the theory vs.
application tension typical of MLIS programs. Most DH courses in LIS
departments focus on technologies, without concomitant attention to a
foundational understanding of the varied research methods and resource usage
patterns of humanities scholars. The DH Librarianship course aims to provide
students with an understanding of how humanities scholars work,
both traditionally and digitally, as well as familiarity with resources and
tools used in digital humanities scholarship. The course also covers political
and practical issues: what roles do librarians play in DH research, and what
roles are situationally appropriate—tech guru, data cleaner, resource
purchaser, equal collaborator? During the quarter, the course tackles questions
of sustainability, accessibility, ethics, and equity in representation. Guest
speakers include DH librarians (both with and sans MLIS), new DH faculty in
various disciplines, and seasoned humanities researchers.

Assignments include disciplinary exploration, which allows students to explore
resources and DH projects in philosophy, religion, fine and performing arts,
languages and literatures. Student groups examine DH tools that range from
timelines and mapping to text mining, information visualization, data
cleaning, and network analysis, and create presentations from a shared corpus.
In the final “DH consultation” assignment, students locate a
project—in-process, abandoned, or “complete”—and propose options for
library-based support, based on a disciplinary needs assessment. They also
provide suggestions for strengthening the content, usefulness, or reach of the
project, as well as a tools/usability assessment, which may include creating a
prototype of an improved project.

The pedagogy reflects the multi-faceted disciplinary grounding and
technological approach of the course content. My experience as an academic
humanities librarian is bolstered by the research of many, including Melissa
Terras, who discusses the need to identify core values and “hidden histories”
of disciplines (2006), and Marcia Bates, who defines distinctions between
disciplines such as the humanities and meta-disciplines like LIS (1999). In LIS
we analyze the processes and domains of disciplines—in this case those involved
in DH—and how those are represented, accessed, and given meaning across the
corpora of recorded information. Mike Caulfield's writing (2016) on multiple
digital literacies also resonates with the pedagogies used, demonstrating the
need for domain-grounded literacy to help students ascertain next steps and
appropriate tools in their work with humanities scholars and projects.

The hybrid format of the class contributes to the collaborative pedagogy: local
online and residential students attend the technology-enabled classroom
in person, and others attend via the online Zoom classroom. Students can
participate via audio or text, share screens, display presentations, or work in
groups. Cameras in the classroom broadcast what is happening locally, and those
attending online enable their webcams to be more fully present. In addition,
several students each week attend via Kubi robots, which are iPads on movable
stands that online users rotate to focus on different classroom activities.
Guest speakers may attend in person, or they may present and engage with
students via online options. These diverse modes of learning increase the
students' comfort with multiple technologies, which they are then more likely
to use in their own research and teaching.

Learning outcomes include familiarity with the structure of knowledge in the
humanities disciplines as well as the wide array of resources that provide ref-

erence and bibliographic support for research. Students are able to connect
issues and concepts in DH to ongoing projects and scholarship, and they are
able to articulate the ways in which library support fits into a changing
paradigm of research in the humanities disciplines. In addition, students
understand issues concerning equity, representation, and emotional labor
in conjunction with digital humanities librarianship.

This poster will highlight the multiple teaching and learning techniques used
in the course and student projects. It will also showcase the physical and
virtual teaching and learning spaces.

