“A Trace of this Journey”: Citations of Digitised Newspapers in UK History PhD
Theses

Paul Matthew Gooding

p.gooding@uea.ac.uk

University of East Anglia, United Kingdom

“In two weeks, despite these notes, I shall no longer believe in what I am
experiencing now. One must leave behind a trace of this journey which memory
forgets” (Cocteau, 2013).

Academic citations are prostheses for the scholarly memory, providing traces of
a text's origins. They are also, taken collectively, a powerful source of
information on scholarly influence, links between authors, and academic
publishing trends. This paper will present work in progress to discover the
extent to which citation patterns by UK historians have been affected by
digitisation of historical newspapers. Previous studies into digital resources
have used citation analysis for impact analysis (Meyer et al., 2009), but faced
problems gathering accurate data due to researchers' unwillingness to cite
digital resources. Text mining mentions of titles within a digital resource
offers a solution to this problem; indeed, Milligan (2013) has successfully
used techniques from Natural Language Processing to track citations of major
Canadian newspapers in Canadian PhD theses. However, there are local variations
around academic practice, and cultural heritage digitisation, and to date there
has been no largescale study of digital resource citations in the
United Kingdom.

This paper will present my efforts to mine newspaper citation trends using over
6,000 history theses submitted at UK Higher Education institutions, from 1999
to 2015. It will also consider the implications of text mining using legal
deposit library collections. Its significance is therefore twofold. It is the
first study to use text mining to track citations in UK history theses, thereby
providing insights into the effect of local digitised primary sources. Second,
by collaborating with British Library Labs, it provides an important test
case of the possibility of exploring the text mining exception in UK copyright
law. This study therefore focuses on two key research questions:

• What does citation analysis of UK history theses tell us about the impact of
historic newspaper

digitisation on early career historians in the United Kingdom?

• How far does the ability to text and data mine copyrighted materials provide
for data driven approaches when applied to legal deposit library collections?

Research context

In the last fifteen years several studies have proposed models for evaluating
the impact of digital resources (Warwick et al., 2006; Meyer et al., 2009;
Tanner, 2012). Citation analysis is commonly used in impact evaluation, and is
a well-established biblio-metric technique for impact analysis (MacRoberts and
MacRoberts, 1989). As part of the wider field of bibliometrics, citation
analysis has been used to judge the impact of academic publications and digital
resources (Meyer et al., 2009). Citations are proxy measures of how frequently
a document or resource is used, founded on the assumption that there is
a strong positive correlation between the number of citations that a resource
or article attracts, and the quality of that resource (Smith, 1980). The
reality, though, is that citation practices are not always followed or
understood by academics. Smith (1980) noted several reasons a scholar may
choose not to cite a document: inability to obtain the document; inability to
read a foreign language; lack of relevance to their work; or lack of awareness
of existing work. There are further reasons for digital resources; not least a
lack of awareness of how to cite them (Su-kovic, 2009), and disciplinary
unwillingness to acknowledge their usage (Meyer, 2009). As a result, the
traditional method of mining only citations provide an unreliable picture of
citation levels of digital resources.

Furthermore, there is a need to account for the varied local and national
context within which researchers operate. In Canada, for instance, there is
a feeling among scholars that the “limited and fragmented” (Kheraj, 2014)
newspaper digitisation programme lags behind nations such as the USA, Australia
and United Kingdom. The prominence of The Toronto Star and The Globe and Mail
mirrors the early years of newspaper digitisation in the United Kingdom, where
the ubiquity of the Times Digital Archive encouraged some to overstate its
repre

sentativeness (Bingham, 2010). Contemporary digitised newspaper resources in
the UK by contrast, tend to aggregate dozens of newspaper titles into a single
resource. This paper therefore explores the likelihood that this aggregation
process may have caused different citation patterns among UK re

searchers, who are the largest group to access these resources (Gooding, 2014),
providing a comparison

with the differing Canadian context presented by

Milligan.

Methodology

To achieve this, I will focus on newspaper titles

from two British Library resources: British Library Nineteenth Century
Newspapers (BNCN) and The British Newspaper Archive (BNA). I intend to identify
mentions of newspapers by title within the full text of UK history theses. The
dataset comes from EThOS, a national service which makes UK doctoral theses
available online for searching and reading. EThOS contains approximately
440,000 records relating to theses awarded by over 120 institutions. It
provides a comprehensive, systematically collected dataset for comparison of
citation trends over time. Around 160,000 records provide access to searchable
full text, and I have worked with British Library Labs to identify a subset of
history theses published from 1999 to 2015; in total, over 6,000 theses were
identified using Dewey Decimal Classifiers, covering eight years before and
after the launch of BNCN in 2007. These theses will be searched using Natural
Language Processing techniques to identify the incidence of specific newspaper
titles that are included in BNCN and BNA, allowing me to identify how many
theses use a given source, and how frequently each source was used.

This project also acts as a test case for text mining of British Library
collections. In 2014, the UK government introduced an exception to copyright
law to ensure that researchers undertaking text and data-min-ing for
non-commercial purposes would no longer infringe copyright (Intellectual
Property Office, 2014), without requiring that publishers took steps to
guarantee the availability of suitable datasets for text mining. In reality,
this means that there are many potentially valuable data sources that could be
legally studied, but no infrastructure to do so. Starting with the British
Library's PhD thesis holdings, I intend to work with British Library Labs to
explore the possibility of opening up further datasets for text mining.

Conclusion

This paper will explore the ways in which historical newspaper digitisation
have impacted upon historiography among early career researchers in the
United Kingdom, by tracking citations of digitised newspaper titles over time
in the full text of over 6,000 PhD theses. This is the first study to apply
text mining of digital resource citations to the UK context. It also provides
an important case study of text and data mining in legal deposit library
collections, in the light of current limitations to the UK copyright exception.
In doing so, this project will not only illuminate the ways in which digital
resources can affect local research practices, but will demonstrate the utility
of text mining in addressing the methodological limitations of citation
analysis for digital resources. We must adopt new computational methods to
ensure that the traces of this use are not wiped away by citation practices
which continue to de-em-phasise the role of digital resources in
contemporary research.

