PERiSCOPE: Personalized Color Profiles A modern methodology for rendering
colour in digital media displays

Peter Fornaro

peter.fornaro@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Sofia Georgakopoulou

s.georgakopoulou@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Lukas Rosenthaler

lukas.rosenthaler@unibas.ch

Digital Humanities Lab, University of Basel, Switzerland

Colour and colour perception are of great relevance for many scientific fields
and constitute important aspects of the aesthetic appearance of most artwork.
In art history, visual arts, media sciences and photography, colour is an
important attribute for assessing and reviewing most objects. Virtual
Research Environments, for example, allow scholars to access, compare, and
discuss digital renderings of paintings, photographs, video and motion
pictures. The quality of colour rendering of these digital objects is
crucial for most analytical work because colour is one of the most important
features that is communicated. We propose to revolutionize the current colour
rendering methodologies on state-of-the art displays and printers, for better
“true” colour management of digital still images, video, or motion pictures.

Since the early years of colour science, the 1931 CIE Standard Observer has
been a major reference for colour reproduction (Guild, 1925, 1932;
Wright, 1929). The CIE Standard Observer defines how we can quantify colours
that we see in the linear XYZ, or the perception-based Lab colour space. There
are, however, several disadvantages to the system, arising mainly from the
inherent assumptions made during the (very controlled) colour matching
experiments used to derive the colour-matching functions (MacDonald, 2015).
Most significantly, the original approach describes only the average of the
experimental results, while those results are based on a small group of test
individuals, in this case, 49 British men. Since the original experiment does
not address the physiology of an individual observer, it has
several qualitative limitations that result in colour reproduction with limited
accuracy.

Since the original Standard Observer experiment, several studies have been
performed aiming to improve the original colour matching functions
(CMFs). Stiles and Burch, in 1959, repeated the experiment this time with an
increased viewing field of 10 degrees, from the 2 degrees used for the 1931
results (Stiles & Burch, 1959). More recently, in the ‘90s, groups critically
analyzed the 1939 and 1959 results to derive more precise CMFs. This is the
case with Stockman et al in 1999 (Stockman, Sharpe, & Fach, 1999), who were
able to propose new spectral sensitivity functions for the S-cones (the eye's
short-wavelength light receptor), both with their own experimental methods and
by analyzing the existing functions. Meanwhile, individual differences in
CMFs were estimated by North and Fairchild in 1993, this time by performing a
small number of colour matching measurements and using a computational model to
derive the CMFs (North & Fairchild, 1993a, 1993b). Investigations of individual
variabilities in detecting colour among colour-normal individuals were
performed in 2015 by Asano et al. and showed higher than expected interobserver
variability (Asano,

Fairchild, Blonde, & Morvan, 2015).

There are multiple studies that have been investigating the connection between
colour perception and physiological (Abramov, Gordon, Feldman, & Chavar-ga,
2012a)(Abramov, Gordon, Feldman, & Chavarga, 2012b) and cultural (Collier,
1973; Merrifield, 1971)(Winawer et al., 2007)(Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, &
Shapiro, 2006) differences, however the mechanisms that control the individual
colour perception (i.e. the specific way that each person sees, understand and
responds to colour) are not fully understood.

In this project, we plan to revisit the Standard Observer Experiment (SOE) and
test its validity for different portions of the population. We will employ
current technologies to develop and use a modern experimental setup based on
LEDs and emphasize on these specific parameters of interest:

•    The target colour in the full range of wavelengths in the visible range

•    The geometry (size) of the colourfield

•    The background the colour is surrounded by (limited to a specific set of
colours)

• The ambient light conditions

The group of probands shall comprise of a large pool of individuals
representing different ages, genders, social background and cultures. Our
experimental setup will help to simplify the measurements of individual
tristimulus functions for a more generalized application.

The original SOE has already shown a large variety of individual results, even
though the number of probands was very small. Especially for the red
primary, the observers have shown large differences in the required colour-mix
to get a perceived colour match between the target colour and the mixing
colours. With the experimental results we will confirm these differences in the
colour matching experiment and move further to quantify the deviation both in
wavelength and intensity of the individual tristimulus functions. If the
principal shape of the three functions is comparable and the frequency shift is
small relative to the full visible range, the experimental setup needed to
measure the individual colour-matching functions can be drastically simplified.

Additionally, we pursue the development of a simplified experimental setup that
will have a more generalized use. Previous colour-matching experiments using
LEDs provide invaluable insight into the technical regarding optics
requirements and electronics design (Morvan, Sarkar, Stauder, Blonde, &
Kervec, 2011). The setup will consist of a device that can illuminate a test
area with a red, blue and green primary of adjustable intensity. With such a
mobile colourmatching device, the SOE can be simplified. The simplification of
the experiment allows for observers to characterize their individual colour
perception in a fast and uncomplicated way. The long-term goal is to develop
automated single-observer colour measuring, which can be used to create
personalized colour profiles (PERsonalIzed COlour ProfilEs PERiSCOPE),
with which we will be able to uniquely calibrate the user's viewing
instruments, i.e. screens, printers etc. that are part of a conventional ICC
colour management workflow. A simplified but straightforward experiment is the
calculation and rendering of an image based on

the scaled integral of spectral image data, regarded as

spectral reflectance information for each pixel, S(A, px, py) multiplied by the
spectral power distribution of the illuminant I(A) and e.g. the two extrema of
the CIE's color matching functions Xmin(A), ymin(A), Zmin(A) as well as Xmax
(A), ymax(A), Zmax(A). Such an experimental calculation results in two
significantly different images, each representing a rendering based
on different experimental data sets of individuals of the

SOE. Such different renderings might have a significant effect on the
perception of image data and it is a step towards the separation and
equalisation of the various effects in the human visual system.

The results and the consequences of the project will be assessed together with
experts of art history, media sciences and psychology. We believe that
the implications of using personalized color profiles for image renderings will
have a strong impact on various fields within the (digital) humanities, which
will pave the way for new findings and better understanding. How is e.g. the
same rendering of a colour photograph seen by two observers with different
physiology? What are the effects of the perception of colour if the colour is
adjusted to the physiology and described by of the two observers? How is an
observer reacting, if the two observer renderings are shown to the
same observer, showing the differences clearly? What effect has such an
adjusted colour rendering to the description of eg. colour aesthetics? What is
the consequence of seeing an image which is rendered for colour according to
the data other person, in other words, if we see an artwork through the eyes of
another person, eg. the artist itself? Those questions will be discussed in an
interdisciplinary framework with other disciplines, especially art history and
media sciences.

In terms of research in cultural heritage and art in humanities universities,
museums, and other art institutes, our studies can change the way research
is performed and will affect the results of this research, as the tools will
become available to introduce the aspect of personal perception. Art is to a
great extent a personal experience and institutes have to invent ways to make
it objective in order to be able to discuss it in more general terms and draw
conclusions about its effect in populations, cultures and times that may be
foreign to the researchers today. The PERiSCOPE will adapt an artefact's colour
on a digital display according to the viewer's profile. Thus it will allow
scientists to truly see the same colour image at the same time and will help
reduce the subjectivity of judging an artefact’s appearance.

The DHLab also operates DaSCH (The National Data and Service Center for the
Humanities), which includes a Virtual Research Environment in the humanities
for sustainable collaborative work with digital sources. This web-based
infrastructure can be ideally used for the discussion and collaborative
evaluation of our colour results. It would make it possible for researchers to
get a deeper understanding of each other’s comments and critique in terms of
colour. It would also enable viewers to see a work of art in the way the artist
- in case he or she is still living - perceives it. Finally, if we are able to
also categorize colour profiles to fit different population groups,
the PERiSCOPE will also enable colour specialists (researchers or even industry
stakeholders) to use colour in a way that would make the greatest impact to
a specific part of the population.

Our research can also greatly impact research in psychology, in terms of
personal perception and emotion, by providing new, more accessible methods
for measuring and assessing responses to colour stimuli. Much of the knowledge
we have about colour perception today comes from the field of psychology.
For every colour-related project, researchers have to recreate some form of the
SOE. With the PERiSCOPE mobile setup, we will be able to offer a
standardised, easy-to-use system that will provide an efficient, reliable and
reproducible methodology for these studies.

