The Intellectual Structure of Digital Humanities:

An Author Co-Citation Analysis

Jin Gao

jin.gao.13@ucl.ac.uk

UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom

Oliver Duke-Williams

o.duke-williams@ucl.ac.uk

UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom

Simon Mahony

s.mahony@ucl.ac.uk

UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom

Melanie Ramdarshan Bold

m.bold@ucl.ac.uk

University College London, United Kingdom

Julianne Nyhan

j.nyhan@ucl.ac.uk

UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom

Introduction

With many ongoing debates (Gold, 2012) and “unwritten” histories (Nyhan and
Flinn, 2016), the research practice of the Digital Humanities (DH) has been
around for 70 years. Many works have been trying to draw general conclusions of
the disciplinary structure (McCarty, 2003; Gold, 2012; Terras et al., 2013;
Schreibman et al., 2016; Nyhan and Flinn, 2016), and have pointed to the
potential usefulness to analyse the discipline from statistical aspects. The
usefulness focuses on describing the intellectual structure, scholarly
interactions and disciplinary development of DH. Some studies have dedicated
their attention to these matters (Grandjean, 2016; Nyhan and Duke-Williams,
2014; Quan-Haase et al., 2015; Wang and Inaba, 2009), or have focussed on one
of these topics (Sugimoto et al., 2013), but few of them have engaged either
with the bibliometric network method, or with the latest large-scale scholarly
datasets to study the DH community as a whole.

Therefore, to fill this gap, based on a provisional dataset that has been
compiled from core DH journals, this study performs an exclusive
all-author co-citation analysis (ACA) with the 200 most cited scholars by
fractional citation count to map and demonstrate the intellectual structure and
to identify the most influential scholar groups and topics within DH.

To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to apply bibliometric
methods to visualise DH knowledge structure and the scholar clusters.
This research output will make a valuable contribution to the current
discussions and debates about DH knowledge structure and wider scholarly
networks.

Methodology

With ACA as the main methodology, the research contains four steps, and each
with a different methodology: building a DH citation index according to the
publications of these journals; selecting authors as the core objects for
citation analysis; assigning scholars to different distance-based clusters by
calculating the author co-citation matrix to similarity matrix (Waltman and van
Eck, 2013); finally, visualising the DH citation network which aims to show the
scholar clusters, and the knowledge structure and diffusion of DH.

The three DH core journals that our dataset has been constructed from are: “
Computers and the Humanities” (CHum), “Digital Humanities Quarterly” (DHQ), “
Literary and Linguistic Computing” (LLC) (now “Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities”) (DSH). The bibliographies as well as the metadata of all their
publications (including the reviews and editorials etc.) published until June
2016 have been collected. It should be noted that none of these journals
spanned the whole period selected (19662016): CHum, the first DH journal
started in 1996, and ceased publication in 2004; LLC/DSH began in 1986; DHQ
began in 2007. Figure 1 shows the total publications each year from 1966 until
June 2016 for these journals.

[083-1]

Figure 1. In total, 3,068 journal articles: CHum (1,195 articles with 26,033
citations), LLC/DSH (1,633 articles with 28,501 citations), and DHQ (240
articles with 4,289 citations)

Author co-citation analysis (ACA) can reveal the intellectual structure of a
field from its academic publications by calculating the frequencies with which
two authors are cited together. That is to say, if an article cites at least
one article of author A, and at least one of author B that is different from
the one of A, the co-citation count increases by 1. The more co-citations two
authors receive, the more likely their publications and researches are related 
(Bellardo, 1980). Therefore, the clusters of related authors indicate the
networks of research topics, or influential focuses within a discipline.

The initial findings with the top cited 200 authors displayed on the maps (see
the provisional maps in

Figure 2 and Figure 3) have provisionally revealed

five sub-fields within DH.

,«owsky. d.

[083-2]

Figure 2. The provisional ACA network map in DH, data from journals CHum, LLC/
DSH, and DHQ, 1966-2016, created using VOSviewer

[083-3]

Figure 3. The provisional ACA density map in DH, data from journals CHum, LLC/
DSH, and DHQ, 1966-2016, created using VOSviewer

Both of the maps (Figure 2 and Figure 3) are

distance-based. Each node on the map represents an author, and the distance
between two authors is their relations (the closer the distance, the
stronger the connection). Authors are distributed quite unevenly, and this
makes it easy to identify clusters of related nodes. The size of the node
represents the citation count this author received, and the higher the citation
count is, the bigger the node. On the density map, the density value depends on
the size, number and distance of the nodes around it, so the higher the density
value, the colour is more red than blue.

Both maps have revealed the general structure of the scholarly communication
between DH scholars via publications. Horizontally across the centre of the
map, there is a loosely connected circle of five DH scholar clusters: centre
(focused on “Leech, G”), top (focused on “Miller, G”), bottom (focused
on “Nerbonne, J”), left (focused on “Holmes, D.I”), and right (focused on
“McCarty, W”). The clusters distribution on the density map reveals that there
is a clear separation between top, centre, right clusters to left and bottom
clusters. Especially the right cluster (focused on “McCarty, W”) and the left
cluster (focused on “Holmes, D.I”) turn out to be denser than other clusters.
This shows that these two clusters are more significant and have more citation
influence. According to the provisional analysis, these five clusters appear to
be associated with five different DH research topics: English study at the
centre; general historical literacy and information science on the right;
language modelling and natural language processing at the top; statistics and
text analysis on the left; computational linguistics particularly on Dutch and
German speaking at the bottom. These five clusters, however, are also grouped
into two different bigger groups. The English study, language modelling, and
general historical literacy seem to be in one group which is more related,
while the statistics and Dutch-German linguistics are also very closely related
to each other.

Limitations and Future study

This research is part of the first author's ongoing PhD study, funded by UCL
ORS scholarship and based at the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities.
The doctoral reseach maps DH intellectual, social and environmental structures
using the Invisible College model (Zuccala, 2006).

There are some limitations that need to be noted, such as the citation lag
time. In order to build up a citation record for co-citation, it takes around
five to eight years (Hopcroft et al., 2004). This could explain that certain
recognisable authors might not appear on the maps yet. Also, because the
co-citation method studies the knowledge base as its subject, the map emphases
more on authors published some time ago, which might not include the “new
comers”.

In the future work, the ACA study will be extended to include more citation
data. The ACA study will be divided into discreet periods to construct maps of
different DH development stages. Given that different journals have different
topical foci, the research will also analyse individual journal to discover its
attribute.

