Death by Numbers: Bills of Mortality in Early Modern London

Jessica Otis

jotis@andrew.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University

The foundation of Death by Numbers: Bills of Mortality in Early Modern London
is the construction of a relational database containing plague
mortality information from the London Bills of Mortality in all their varying
levels of granularity. Plague first entered England in 1348, as part of a
continent-wide epidemic that killed approximately one third of the
population of Europe. Thereafter, England suffered continuous outbreaks of
plague through 1679, and fear of plague lasted well into the eighteenth
century. The most well-documented epidemics of the early modern era were in
England's cities, particularly London, which suffered six major epidemics in
the century between 1563 and 1665, and lost an estimated 225,000 people to
plague. During the mid-sixteenth century, in response to these epidemics, some
city officials began to compile numerical summaries of local deaths
and circulated those mortality statistics in manuscript form. By the turn of
the seventeenth century, there was enough popular interest in these numbers
that officials in the city of London began publishing weekly mortality
statistics in a series known as the Bills of Mortality. The weekly bills
included a parish-byparish list of total deaths and plague deaths, along
with running tallies of city-wide christenings, deaths broken down by a variety
of causes, and parishes infected with plague. London's weekly bills were
also supplemented annually with a general account of the preceding year,
published on the Thursday before Christmas. Over the first half of the
seventeenth century, more parishes were added to the bills, including the
parishes in surrounding counties and in the neighboring city of Westminster,
until the "Bills of Mortality" formed a recognized geographical unit
that included all of London and its suburbs.

The Bills of Mortality are thus a vital source of information about the
population of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century London. They have been
analyzed by politicians, demographers, historians, and epidemiologists as early
as the seventeenth century itself, but currently only the bills from a few
select epidemic years are available online. Construction of the Bills of
Mortality database is thus a vital step for both this project and for future
digital humanists interested in the bills. After the construction of
this database, this project will use network analysis to examine the
transmission of plague between residents of London's parishes during both
famous epidemic outbreaks and the periods of endemic plague that followed them.
Subjects of particular interest in this analysis include the change in
infection patterns over time, how the infrastructural and geographical features
of the city act as barriers or "highways" to

infection, and the devastating impact of - and slow recovery from - the Great
Fire of London while plague was still active in the city. The project will also
include a mapping component to visualize mortality trends by parish over time,
with particular interest in the full duration of epidemics as opposed to each
epidemic's highest mortality (and highest profile) year. Eventually the Bills
of Mortality database, as well as materials associated with the network
analysis and visualizations, will be made freely available online
in accessible, sustainable formats for reuse by other members of the scholarly
community.

