Dead and Beautiful: The

Analysis of Colors by Means

of Contrasts in Neo-Zombie

Movies

Niels-Oliver Walkowski

walkowski@bbaw.de

Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften Germany

Johannes Pause

johannes.pause@tu-dresden.de

Technische Universität Dresden

The analysis of color in movies is a topic of increasing interest in the
still-young research field known as digital film analysis or cinemetrics.
The thesis of Brodbeck (2011) is one of the early examples which have been
discussed broadly. Brodbeck created a donut plot for each movie in which
dominant colors of scenes are represented by colored slices within the plot.
Similar approaches were taken by (Baker 2015) and (Burghardt, Kao, and Wolff
2016). Both approaches identify dominant colors of all frames in a movie and
represent these colors as lines in a barcodelike visualization. In the first
and the third project dominant colors are created by means of a clustering-

algorithm, more precisely k-means. This algorithm is

one of the most common approaches in color quantization and is also delivered
for such tasks in well-known computer vision libraries like OpenCV.

However, there are several issues with using k-means for color quantization in
digital film analysis which are rarely discussed within the community. One of
the more obvious problems is that k-means (and other non-hierarchical cluster
algorithms) require pre-definition of the number of clusters to be found. Thus,
an automated analysis of around 180,000 frames in a movie does not respect the
fact that there are frames which are more complex in color than others. A more
sophisticated procedure exists in which the k-means algorithm is used in a loop
with different numbers of cluster. In this approach the best fitting number of
clusters is defined and evaluated by the silhouette coefficient which is
applied to the result of each loop. However, Figure 1 demonstrates that the

best-fit in terms of clustering is definitely not the bestfit for the
interpretation of colors in film analysis.

[095-1]

Figure 1: Cluster analysis of dominant colors in a frame image of The Walking
Dead. According to the silhouette coefficient the number of two clusters
produces the best clustering result.

Colors which seem to be important even before any interpretation has taken
place disappear in the clustering process because they are 'eaten' by
other clusters. Figure 2 offers a very impressive example for this phenomenon.
The red girl from Schindler's List -the most exciting thing that happens in the
movie in terms of color- is not represented within the clusters transparently.
The reason is that k-means has a tendency towards equally sized clusters and
that the color difference is not big enough to survive this tendency.

[095-2]

Figure 2: Cluster analysis of color in a scene from 'Schindler's List'

Another problem is that k-means produces slightly different results each time
it runs. Hence, sometimes a color which would be perceived as different
by humans is present in the result and sometimes it is not. The results differ
most in between three and five clusters as predefined cluster values. However,
this is exactly the span which is most often used for color quantization in
digital film analysis. Finally, the k-means algorithm produces different
results in correspondence with the color space in which a frame is represented.
For instance, the HSV color space produces better results than the RGB color
space.

All of these problems call for a theoretical evaluation of what dominance means
for dominant colors in digital film analysis. Unfortunately, the previously
mentioned projects have not presented such evaluations. Furthermore, these
projects also did not systematically interpret the results they have produced.
For this reason, it is not transparent which semantics can be found in the
patterns.

All this being said, a different approach for the computational analysis of
colors in movies seems necessary. This approach needs to introduce a
starting point which is technologically less arguable and which offers concepts
for the interpretation of results. The

approach that will be presented builds upon the

theory of seven color-contrasts developed by Johannes Itten (Itten 1961,
36-109). Itten claims that the effect of colors is not absolute but depends on
the surrounding color environment. Colors interact with each other and there
are seven contrasts in which this interaction can be analyzed. These contrasts
are:

•    hue

•    saturation

•    light-dark

•    cold-warm

•    complementary

•    simultaneous

•    extension

Each contrast has certain capabilities to structure and create effects in the
narrative and aesthetic design of a movie. They can be used: to guide the
attention of viewers, to create spatial ambiance, to create orientation or
confusion, to support the symbolic layer or to create associations as well as
emotions. Although these effects are not generalizable the approach
of color-contrasts has more to provide to interpret color in movies than the
analysis of single colors. This holds true especially where the dynamics of
multiple contrasts are related with each other and begin to form a language of
color. For instance, a movie might have a stable opposition between cold and
warm colors but more progressive color dynamics (Wulff 1988) between light and
dark colors. The results of such an analysis can be related to narrative
aspects, characters, leitmotifs or the Mise en Scène in a movie or a corpus of
movies.

The technological implementation of this approach depends on the type of
contrast that will be analyzed.

Data for the first three contrasts can be obtained by converting movie frames
to the HSV or HSB color space. The conversion between the YUV color space
(in which many movie files are represented) into HSV is lossless in most cases
(Ford and Roberts 1998). Each channel in HSV represents one such contrast.
Usage of the CIE L*a*b* color space can be considered to comply with certain
issues of color awareness that are not tackled by HSV and others. Other
contrasts require further processing. For instance, to obtain cold and warm
color values, each value in the hue channel can be associated with a value that
represents how warm or cold it is. In general, values of red and yellow
are conceived as warm. However, this effect is very much influenced by cultural
and psychological aspects (Küppers 2000). Therefore, the association of
color values with values of warmth is a task that requires decision-making. In
contrast, the presence of complementary and simultaneous colors is
a mathematical relationship and can be computed within a certain color space
consistently.

There are also several ways in which contrast data can be analyzed. Figures 3
and 4 visualize two of such strategies. In both cases a histogram of one
contrast was computed for every second of the movie. In Figure 3 the leftmost
and rightmost peaks in each histogram was calculated. These peaks constitute
the min- and max-bound of the contrast span in each frame. The x-axis
represents the time-axis of the movie while the y-axis shows the value of each
min- and max-bound.

[095-3]

Figure 3: Slightly interpolated boundaries of light-dark contrast in '28 Days
Later'

In Figure 4 the contrast of a spectrum was reduced to 16 bins and each contrast
value that was produced by a critical number of pixels was plotted as a point.
The size of the point represents the number of pixels in a frame for each bin.

[095-4]

Figure 4: The appearance of hue values above a certain threshold in '28 Days
Later'

The movie which underlies both visualizations is 28 Days Later. Figure 3
represents the light-dark-contrast. It shows two sequences in which light
and dark colors go up simultaneously for a certain amount

of time. One sequence is between the 200th and the 800th frame the other
between the 6000th and the beginning of the credits. In the first sequence
the protagonist Jim awakes from coma and realizes that the world fell apart. In
the second sequence the main group of persons reach the final save place. Thus,
a similar pattern in one contrast frames the
actual storyline.    However,    the    color-itself-contrast

represented in Figure 4 is extremely different in these scenes. The first scene
has a narrow spectrum while the spectrum of the second scene is broad. The
narrow spectrum provokes disorientation because it tones down differences. The
color segment is literally dazzling. In contrast, the spectrum and coverage
of colors at the end mediate clarity, stability and order.

This presentation will outline the problems of k-means for color quantification
in digital film analysis. It will describe the theory of seven color-contrasts
and give examples how such theory can be adopted computationally. Each step
will be illustrated by an analysis of a corpus of three neo-zombie-movies,
more precisely 28 Days Later, '[REC]' and World War Z.

