Modeling Student

Authorship: The Rhetoric of Markup in the Writing Classroom

Kevin G. Smith

kgsmith2@gmail.com

Northeastern University, United States of America

This poster reports on research that examines the use of XML markup for student
authoring, a marked shift from the mimetic roots of XML and its primary use in
digital humanities research, the TEI. Thus far, two courses have been taught
with a total enrollment of 35 students (19 students in advanced writing for the
technical professions, Summer 2016; 14 students in first-year writing, Fall
2016). The research questions are: How does markup function rhetorically when
used for authorship? Does writing in XML and designing schemas for authoring
contribute to students' understanding of their writing and reading processes?
Do reading and writing practices in the markup classroom transfer to other
contexts?

These research questions present unique methodological concerns for the study
of markup. How can we make claims about the rhetorical and expressive
capacities of authorial markup? How can we better understand the role of the
schema, the markup, and the platform(s) in students' writing, reading, and
thinking processes? In short, how do we study this? These questions
will animate the presentation of preliminary results, the subject of the
poster.

There has been considerable interest in the semantics of markup languages at
recent TEI (Ciotti & Tomasi, 2014; Eide, 2013) and DH conferences
(Sperberg-McQueen Marcoux, & Huit-feldt, 2010, 2014), most of which has
centered around formal approaches to modeling semantics to explicate the
meaning of markup (Sperberg-McQueen, Huitfeldt, & Renear, 2000). A
related thread of markup research has examined the rhetorical and expressive
capacities of markup (Flanders, 2004; Flanders & Fiormonte, 2007), growing out
of an understanding of markup as not merely descriptive, but also interpretive
and, indeed, performative (Renear, 2000). Though

Wernimont and Flanders (2007) have discussed the potentials of authorial markup
to expand our shared notions of scholarly communication, markup in this
authorial realm remains rarely used (one exception being the work of Desmet
et al., 2005) and even more rarely studied in a systematic way. This poster
will present preliminary results from just such an attempt—a sustained study of
an experimental approach to XML as a technology for the production of texts.

The production of texts, in this case, was undertaken by two cohorts of
undergraduate students. In addition to writing their assignments in XML (using
Oxygen), these courses engaged students in a semester-long, collaborative
writing project: the design and implementation of a custom XML schema that
structurally and rhetorically models a range of genres of writing.
Pedagogically, this approach aims to foster the close attention and
metacognition often cited in classroom-oriented uses of XML/TEI (e.g., Singer,
2013; Conatser, 2013). Where this approach to markup differs from earlier uses,
however, is in the thoroughly bottom-up, data driven approach to schema design
(Piez, 2001). Students begin with a (basically) bare schema and—iteratively
and deliberately over the course of an entire semester—design and revise the
schema for a range of writing tasks using document analysis and modeling,
qualitative writing research methods, and their own experiences of authorship.

To research these classes, I employed a teacher research methodology—a
systematic approach to data collection that honors the inside perspectives of
teachers and students—that adapted qualitative research methods culled
from ethnography, education, and writing studies research. Data was gathered
from direct participant observation, reflective journaling, qualitative
interviews (three interviews each with nine case study students), survey, and
the collection of student writing (normal prose and XML, including version
control logs for all XML files). Teacher research foregrounds and honors the
experiences and perspectives of students as they compose; thus, the particular
methods deployed in this study concern writing as a process, rather than as a
static product. This methodology aligns with research in rhetoric and writing
studies, which, fundamentally, understands “writing (and broader rhetorical
practice) as a verb rather than a noun” (McNely and Teston, 2015: 115).

Preliminary results from the study speak to 1) how students develop and
operationalize genre knowledge; 2) the rhetorical constraints and af-fordances
of schema design as collaborative writing; and 3) markup's reported
intervention into students' thinking and writing processes.

This poster frames this research study as a case study, a demonstration of the
kinds of insights that systematic, qualitative research into markup can foster.
It aims to organize the audience around a series of questions, including:
How are rhetorical theories pertinent to our examination of DH tools and
methods, particularly those of data modeling and representation? How does the
study of student writing/authorship necessitate a willingness to invent methods
sensitive to, and emergent from, particular sites of research? What
methodological (re)orientation does an expansion of our disciplinary objects of
inquiry require? These questions are best explored interactively, through the
dynamic presentation of data generated through this research, and an
exploration of the opportunities and limitations of this qualitative approach
to markup research. Bibliography

Ciotti, F., Lana, M., & Tomasi, F. (2014). "TEI, ontologies, linked open data:
Geolat and beyond.” Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, (8).

Conatser, T. (2013). “Changing medium, transforming composition.” Journal of
Digital Humanities, 2.

Desmet, C., Balthazor, R., Cummings, R., Hilton, N., Mitchell, A., & Hart, A. 
(2005). “<emma>: Reforming composition with XML.” Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 20(Suppl): 25-46.

Eide, 0. (2014). “Ontologies, data modeling, and TEI.” Journal of the Text
Encoding Initiative, (8).

Flanders, J. (2004). “The rhetoric of performative markup.” Critical Inquiry,
31 (1): 49-84.

Flanders, J., & Fiormonte, D. (2007). “Markup and the digital paratext.” 
Digital Humanities 2007: Conference Abstracts.

McNely , B., & Teston, C. (2015). “Tactical and strategic: Qualitative
approaches to the digital humanities.” In Jim Ridolfo and William Hart-Davidson
(eds.), Rhetoric and the Digital Humanities. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 111-126.

Piez, W. (2001). “Beyond the 'descriptive vs. procedural’ distinction.” Markup
Languages, 3(2): 141172.

Renear, A. (2000). “The descriptive/procedural distinction is flawed.” Markup
Languages, 2(4): 411420.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Huitfeldt, C., & Renear, A.

(2000). “Meaning and interpretation of markup.” Markup Languages, 2(3): 215-34.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Marcoux, Y., & Huitfeldt,

C. (2014). “Transcriptional implicature: A contribution to markup semantics.” 
Digital Humanities 2014: Conference Abstracts.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Marcoux, Y., & Huitfeldt,

C. (2010). “Two representations of the semantics of TEI Lite.” Digital
Humanitis 2010: Conference Abstracts.

Wernimont, J., & Flanders, J. (2011). “Possible worlds: Authorial markup and
digital scholarship.” Digital Humanties 2011: Conference Abstracts.

