Throughlines: Exposing Activism and Social Justice Issues in Los
Angeles Transportation History

Britt S. Paris

parisb@ucla.edu

UC Los Angeles, United States of America

Marika Cifor

mcifor@ucla.edu

UC Los Angeles, United States of America

Protesters' shouts of “no justice, no peace” ring out over the rows upon rows
cars forced a standstill on the 405, one of Los Angeles' busiest highways, on a
July night in 2016. This recent protest by Black Lives Matter is notable and
representative of an emergent social movement strategy. More than more than
half of the 1400 protests relating to Black Lives Matter movement in nearly 300
U.S. and international cities from August 2015 to November 2015 effectively
shut down transportation infrastructure (Badger, 2016). This contemporary
activist practice can be seen as a logical tactic that shares roots with the
historical occupations of schools, restaurants and administrative offices
that occurred during protests in the civil rights movement in the United States
in the 1960s and 1970s, as an earlier generation of activists rallied against
racial segregation. Our proposed project makes accessible for the first time
the history of transportation in Los Angeles and demonstrates through
interactive maps, archival documents and audiovisual materials, as well as
recorded oral history interviews why Los Angeles highways have become a
productive site of protest. Contemporary highways are historically situated
sites of contestation in which previous generations of racial-ized communities
have paid the high price for Los Angeles' development into a renowned center of
both commerce and culture.

Historian Eric Avila's (2014) Folklore of the Freeway: Race and Revolt in the
Modernist City focuses on the racist highway projects that targeted and sought
to isolate minority communities. With origins in the Jim Crow South, he argues,
“federally funded highways were instruments of white supremacy, wiping
out black neighborhoods with clear but tacit intent” (p. 43). Post-War Los
Angeles, like many American cities, saw a rise in the prosperity of white,
middle-class Americans who racialized desires and fears led them to towards
suburbia in Los Angeles county and beyond. Redlining, restrictive covenants,
and other practices of racial discrimination kept the dream of suburban home
ownership out of reach of racial minorities. The new American dream came hand
in hand with another new phenomenon, traffic. Highways, according to urban
planning historian Joseph DiMento (2009), were recommended by urban planners as
“the greatest single element in the cure of city ills. The federal government
had stepped in by 1956 to cover the construction costs for highways by up to 90
percent. Much of this federal funding was also used by cities to rebuild and
“redeem” urban areas (Semuels, 2016). New highways were not only placed not
only as to move residents easily into suburbs and to other cities in
the region, but were strategically planned and right placed by cities to
eradicate what were termed “slums” and “blight,” areas heavily populated by
persons of color and the poor (Semuels). Thus highways came to break apart rich
and long-standing communities of color in Los Angeles and throughout the United
States.

From the Chicano artists' depictions of the highway in East Los Angeles to
second-line jazz parade in New Orleans, Avila illustrates how performative
activities pleasure and protest by inhabitants remediate the spaces near
highways to promote and reflect their own diverse perspectives, practices, and
lived realities. East Los Angeles serves an important example of a racialized
working-class community threatened by the construction of freeways. In the
1960s, the 60, 10, 101, 710, and 5 Freeways were all extended to cut through
the East Los Angeles neighborhood. This environment spawned what Raul Homero
Villa has coined as East LA's “expressway generation,” from where some of East
LA's finest muralists emerged. Throughout the 1970s, ASCO, one of the area's
most important Chicano art collectives, used the walls of the freeways as a
canvas to paint political slogans, like “Pinchi Placa Come Caca” (Fucking Pigs
Eat Shit), “Gringo Laws = Dead Chicanos”, “Kill the Pigs”, and “Comida Para
Todos” (Food For Everyone). ASCO turned these geographical sites of state
power, the freeways, into forms of communication that expressed the
relationship between spatial formation and racial tension.

The Black Lives Matter movement in Los Angeles has strategically returned to
freeways. The press release for a December 23, 2015 protest that shut down a
significant section of the 405 Freeway in the Westchester neighborhood explains
the reasoning behind blocking freeway traffic. It states, "On one of
the busiest travel days of the year, Black Lives Matter is calling for a halt
on Christmas as usual in memorial of all of the loved ones we have lost and
continue to lose this year to law enforcement violence without justice or
recourse" (McReynolds, 2015). Pete White, an organizer with Black Lives Matter
and the L.A. Community Action Network, told local news, "In this Christmas
season, we're saying there is no mistletoe in our neighborhood, and it's not
going to be business as usual" (McReynolds, 2015). Black Lives Matter actions

in 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016 have all resulted in successful and strategic
blockages to major thoroughfares, clogging the arteries of the city, and
bringing major media and popular attention. The tactical retaking of freeways
in a notoriously automobile-driven city is symbolically and materially
significant.

We will develop an online interactive repository to provide new access to a
descriptive and underrecognized history of political contestation including the
urban renewal movements of the mid-20th century, the activism of the expressway
generation, and today's Black Lives Matter protests. The necessity of
creating and animating this history is most clearly highlighted by the fact
that there exists no consolidated archive of the historical images, dates and
events related to this phenomenon. Our goal with this project is to provide
a resource that would first, document the intersections of freeways, racial
justice, and urban social movements in an easily-accessible website and second,
promote sustained research and activism relating to this topic. Users are able
curate their own path through the repository, for example, by navigating
through the map, or scrolling through archival records linked to particular
subjects arising within an oral history. This history will be illuminated
through the activation of archival documents, video footage, and oral history
interviews with individuals who have been involved in the historical
development and issues of access intertwined with Los Angeles highways.

(13 July, 2016).    https://www.washing-

tonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/07/13/why-highways-have-
become-the-center-of-civil-rights-protest/

Dimento,J. F. (2009) “Stent (or Dagger?) in the Heart of

Town: Urban Freeways in Syracuse, 1944-1967,” Journal of Planning History, Vol.
8, No. 2: 133-161.

McReynolds, D. (2015) “Section of 405 Freeway Shut

Down by Black Lives Matter Activists.” LAist.com

(December 23, 2015). http://laist.com/2015/12/23/sec-tion of 405 freeway shut
down by.php

Semuels, A. (2016)“The Role of Highways in American Poverty,” The Atlantic (
March 18). http://www.theat-lantic.com/business/archive/2016/03/
role-of-high-ways-in-american-poverty/474282/

