Variation in academics' conceptions of eassessment

Mike Mimirinis

mike.mimirinis@anglia.ac.uk

Anglia Ruskin University (Cambridge), United Kingdom

Earlier research in academic development proposed that enhancing teaching often
derives from changes in how teachers think about their own teaching (Dall’Alba,
1991). Accordingly, the current study postulates that academic teachers
conceptualise e-assessment in a number of qualitatively different ways; some of
them may replicate traditional pedagogical approaches and merely transfer them
to blended or online assessment settings while others may
endorse transformational notions of assessment, underpinning knowledge
construction and student agency. The study aims to synthesize and extend the
findings from two existing clusters of studies. The first cluster derives from
qualitative, non-phenomenographic research exploring conceptions held by
academics about assessment without taking into account the layer of complexity
brought about by technological tools. Influential studies in teachers'
conceptions of teaching and learning identified a continuum of conceptions
ranging from teacher-focused and content-oriented conceptions on the one end to
student-focused and learning-oriented on the other end (for a review see
Kem-ber, 1997). Entwistle (2000) noted that limited evidence suggested that
contrasting conceptions of teaching tend to hold corresponding views on
assessment. Several studies also contended that teachers' conceptions of
learning and teaching affect their approaches to teaching (e.g. Kember & Kwan,
2000). However, there have been no extensive, follow-up studies aimed at
ascertaining whether contrasting conceptions of teaching are aligned to
corresponding views on assessment or what the exact nature of such an alignment
may be. Samuelowicz and Bain (2002) identified a continuum ranging from an
emphasis on knowledge reproduction to an emphasis on knowledge construction and
transformation and Postareff et al. (2012) described categories of conceptions,
from reproductive conceptions to more transformational conceptions of
assessment. The second cluster consists of phenomenographic studies in the area
of conceptions of teaching and learning through technologies. These studies
investigated university teachers' conceptions of, and approaches to e-learning 
(e.g. Ellis et al., 2009; González, 2010) and blended learning (Ellis et al.,
2006). They did not, however, take into account assessment as a distinct
element of the process of university teaching.

The adopted phenomenographic approach aimed to describe the phenomenon from the
perspective of people involved with the phenomenon (Marton & Booth, 1997) i.e.
teachers e-assessing within blended and online environments. Twenty
participants have been invited to attend semi-structured interviews -preceded
by two pilot interviews. The sample was drawn from teachers of a modern British
university; a wide number of disciplinary backgrounds and academics with
differing levels of experience was sought. The interviewers prompted academics
to describe possible ways of utilizing e-assessment tools, their experiences of
practicing e-assessment in general and details about a particular e-assessment
practice they are engaged in. Participants were invited to explain what the
purpose of the e-assessment was, how they understood their role in e-assessment
and what they believed the role of the student was. Rounds of iterative
analysis produced four qualitatively different, hi-erarchically-inclusive and
logically-related categories of how academics conceive of e-assessment.
E-assessment has been seen as a means: (i) managing and streamlining the
assessment process (ii) communicating and engaging with students (iii)
enhancing student learning and the quality of teaching (iv) community and
(digital) identity building. The paper also reports on dimensions of variation,
most importantly the role of the teacher/assessor, the role of the student, the
level and quality of collaboration, the role of the technological medium and,
finally, who benefits from the e-assessment processes. Conclusively, variation
in the way academics conceive of e-assessment is discussed in light of previous
studies in this area; implications for faculty development are approached
under the lens of expanding awareness i.e. how can faculty development promote
qualitatively more advanced conceptions of e-assessment and how can such
interventions can improve student learning.

