Decolonizing Knowledge

Structures in Open Access and Scholarly Publishing

Nirmala Menon

nmenon@iiti.ac.in

Indian Institute of Technology, India

One of the agenda questions for the Internet Researchers Conference (IRC) 2017
scheduled to be held at IIIT, Bengaluru India is: “What research tools and
infrastructures are needed to study, document, annotate, analyze, archive,
cite, and work with (in general) digital objects, especially those in
Indic languages?” However, before we get to this core

question in the research arena we need to confront the

fundamental gap in the conversation- that there are as yet very few digital
objects that are created, developed and preserved in Indian languages.
Shodhganga, a digital repository for dissertations and theses from universities
in India, is a national digitization project that has now grown substantially
as a scholarly resource. Similarly, we have the National Digital Library, a
project that plans to make curricular access electronic. However, both
extraordinary projects are still limited to works that are primarily written
in English. This is especially unfortunate in literature research. Literature
departments across universities in India have a robust scholarship agenda and
have some niche publications that focus on the works of literatures of the
different languages as recognized in the 8^th schedule of the constitution of
India. What is missing is a bridge or a platform that enables a conversation
between the scholarships in these languages. Certain university department
structures-those lacking a department of Literature hospitable to comparatist
conversations- have to take some responsibility for this lack of conversation.
There are complicated economic and social factors beyond the scope of this
discussion that are at play in this disproportionate representation of Indian
literatures. It suffices to say, we need specific digital tools that recognize
and fill this gap.

At the Open Access Scholarly Publishing project at IIT Indore, we have tried to
identify and fulfil what we see as two scholarly imperatives: 1) a commitment
to open access environment as crucial for research accessibility and 2)
providing a platform for multilingual scholarly production with an emphasis
on Indian languages. The Digital Humanities and Publishing Research Group at
IIT Indore has a twopronged approach to what we see as a
fundamental infrastructure problem: the absence of a polyphonic platform for a
scholarly kitchen! The publishing project KSHIP was born from deliberation over
these crucial issues challenging scholarship publishing in India.

KSHIP or Knowledge Sharing in Publishing recognizes this gap and advocates a
philosophy of open access as crucial to a cooperative global knowledge
production network. In its initial pilot/launch phase, KSHIP includes 1) a
project of database development of scholarship and criticism in Indian
languages. (we are starting with three languages, with the eventual goal of
making KSHIP a crowd sourced platform with more languages to be added soon),
and 2) we will be a consciously multilingual publishing house soliciting
(and specifically targeting) scholarly monographs and translations in Indian
languages, while also inviting scholars to host journals in multiple languages.
In this session we would like to discuss some of the technological challenges
of the project and possible solutions with an emphasis on collaborations
across institutions and scholars in India.

The database development project addresses the first issue of dissemination and
access to scholarship in regional language literatures in India. We
have started a pilot with four languages with citation data from three
different languages being uploaded. This will truly be a crowd sourced project
in the future and we are in discussion with journals/publishers about uploading
data to the platform. At least in the beginning, this platform will also be a
part of KSHIP. We are looking for scholars from different languages
to contribute to and be a part of this project. The project will be
collaborative in the largest sense of the term.

The project also includes a prototype of a translation plug-in tool. This is a
crowd-sourcing translation tool developed as part of an UG project and directed
by myself and my colleague from Computer Science, Dr Abhishek Srivastava. We
hope to finesse the initial prototype of the tool over the coming months (and
may even have a final prototype ready by the conference in Montreal!). The
translation tool is designed to slice a scholarly paper/article so that
one paper can potentially be translated by more than one person, and then
moderated and collated at the publisher's end. There are several challenges
posed by such a crowd sourced model. These include, among

others, issues of author/translator attribution, for which we are currently
discussing and thrashing out different options. The interface will also offer
the option of solicited translation, especially in the case of literature
scholarship. We will experiment with the crowd-sourced translation using
scientific and engineering essays.

In this short paper I will discuss: 1) The infrastructure gap in scholarly
publishing in India, 2) the need for this to be addressed with a focus
on multilingual publishing, and 3) the technological challenges specific to an
ambitious long-term project. These questions will inevitably lead to
discussions on digital preservation and the transforming and transformative
role of technology in that process.

