The Third Way: Discovery

Beyond Search and Browse in Letters of 1916

Susan Schreibman

susan.schreibman@nuim.ie

Maynooth University, Ireland

Sara Kerr

sarajkerr@icloud.com Maynooth University, Ireland

Shane McGarry

shane.mcGarry@nuim.ie Maynooth University, Ireland

Letters of 1916 is Ireland’s first digital public humanities project. Launched
in 2013, it has become one of the key corpora in providing new insights
and understandings of the 1916 period. The project collects and transcribes
through crowdsourcing epistolary documents from October 1915 to November 1916
with the goal of creating a window onto a year in the life of the nation. In
the middle of the project’s collection period is the Easter Rising (24-29
April 1916), arguably one of the most important events in Irish history as it
sets in motion Irish independence from Great Britain in 1921.

The year 1916 was chosen not only because of the centrality of the Easter
Rising, but because of Irish participation in the Great War and the historical
significance for this throughout the following century in the construction of
Irish identity. The collection also reestablishes the role of women in their
participation in the Great War as well as the Rising and its aftermath. In
addition, epistolary documents were chosen as a record of the everyday and the
quotidian, providing a window onto a social history that has too often been
repressed or ignored.

With a collection of over 3,500 letters contributed by 54 families and 32
institutions (with new letters being added continually) the corpus is too large
to read in its entirety. While search and browse functionality in the project’s
‘Explore’ Database allows users to restrict results to more manageable
subsets, the complexity of the letter form, with its frequently meandering
content, makes many letters difficult to categorise using a tightly restricted
set of keywords. Full text searching also misses many possible letters of
interest on a particular topic due to the broad register and idiosyncratic use
of language utilised by a wide variety of correspondents (Altman, 88).

A solution to these issues has been to explore the use of alternative methods
of analysis and discovery, including topic modelling, vector space
modelling with t-SNE vector reduction, and semantic network analysis. These
methods provide alternative ways to explore a corpus of this size: too large to
be read in its entirety via close reading, yet not big enough to qualify as big
data. Rather, this type of collection, not out of reach of many DH projects,
might be typified as one of the middle distance in which visualisations can
serve as a series of lenses through which areas of interest can be identified
for further research.

Topic modelling, although computationally expensive and requiring
pre-processing, provides a detailed overview of the corpus and its themes. It
highlights the complexity and variety of the letters' content, as well as
suggesting areas for further analysis. Combining the full text of the letters
with the editorially-assigned keywords has proved a powerful combination in
providing a bird's-eye view of the corpus by theme.

[132-1]

Figure 1. Murder at Portobello Barracks

Figures 1 and 2 show topics 14 and 16 from a model where only the standard
stopwords were removed. Topic 14 relates to the murder of Sheehy Skeffington,
while Topic 16 focuses on internment. The visualisation was created using
‘LDAvis', where

the most distinct terms in the topic can be viewed by

adjusting the relevance metric A to 0.5.

[132-2]

Figure 2. Topic 16 - Internment at Frongoch


Vector space modelling, using the R package ‘wordVectors’ (Schmidt and Li)
which is based on the ‘word2vec’ algorithm (Mikolov et al.), is effective for a
corpus where the researcher is familiar with the broad topics and wishes to
zone in on specific aspects. Rather than asking ‘which topics are in
this corpus?’, it allows the researcher to ask ‘what does the corpus tell us
about this topic?’, revealing syntactic and semantic relationships. This type
of analysis requires less pre-processing than topic modelling and does not
exclude words with a low frequency.

The resulting vector space model can be interrogated, for example by extracting
the words nearest to the word vector. For example, the vector for ‘rising’ (eg
the Irish Rising) results in: ‘outbreak’, ‘scene’, ‘leaders’, ‘theatre’, and
‘hostility’. While we may expect the term ‘theatre’ to refer to a theatre of
war, close reading of the six references to ‘theatre’ in the letters reveals
that two refer to an operating theatre while the remaining four are regarding
theatre as a place of entertainment. Vector rejection can be used to exclude
particular word meanings in cases of polysemy, thus allowing the researcher to
specify which meaning they wish to search for. In the above example a
researcher interested in entertainment could exclude the alternative meanings
by rejecting those words which are related to theatre in the sense
of ‘hospital’ and ‘operation’. This would create a vector with the meaning
‘theatre as a place of entertainment’ enabling a more focused search.

The words nearest the desired search term can be visualised through vector
space reduction to two dimensions. We use the Barnes-Hut implementation
of t-SNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding). The visualisation of
the 500 words nearest to

the vector for ‘rising’ includes a cluster of words: ‘portobello’, ‘murders’,
‘accused’, ‘colthurst’ and ‘dickson’. This refers to the murders of Sheehy
Skeff-ington, Dickson and MacIntyre at Portobello Barracks on the orders of
British officer Bowen-Col-thurst.

[132-3]

Figure 3. The 'Portobello' cluster


[132-4]

Figure 4. The 'herrings' cluster

A second cluster containing the words ‘herrings’, ‘condemned’ and ‘ration’ is
less clear. A key word in context analysis demonstrates one of the strengths of
the vector space model, the word ‘herrings’ only appears seven times in the
corpus, but it sheds significant light onto the lives of those in
internment. Figure 5 illustrates that the first five references to ‘‘herrings’
is in the context of the poor quality of rations provided to the Irish
prisoners in Frongoch, a prisoner of war camp where some 3500 Irish men were
sent after the British put down the Rising.

[132-5]

Figure 5. 'herrings' Key Word in Context

A third analysis builds upon the vector space model by creating a semantic
network based on the cosine similarity of terms. The network is
visualised using the ‘visNetwork’ R package (Almende and

Thieurmel) which can be viewed as an interactive HTML file. This analysis
enables the exploration of multiple dimensions of the model. Here terms can
be clustered and connected with other terms providing a more detailed
representation of the semantic space. This network can suggest a broader and
more nuanced range of themes. Each of the analyses, and associated
visualisations, provide a transformation of the text, disrupting expectations
and providing new avenues for exploration (Clement).

These visualisations are, however, but the first step down the path of the
third way. In order to engage the parahippocampal area of the brain, which
is responsible for drawing context and meaning, we seek to create a more
immersive experience for the reader (Bouchard et al). Thus a layer of
interactivity is being explored to enhance these visualisations. While the
visualisations themselves provide interesting insights into the corpus, they
are, much like a traditional search and browse, rather static implementations
in that they are pre-selected and curated. The project is thus exploring how
users can be provided with the ability to customise these visualisations
through the “slicing” of additional metadata in order to draw comparisons that
may not be readily apparent.

However, this type of interactivity is not without its drawbacks. Both topic
modelling and vector space visualisations require significant processing
power in order to generate the base visualisations and the demands on internal
memory of the processing machine are high as a result. Thus, creating these
types of visualisations in an “on demand” environment is not feasible without a
hardware investment that is beyond the reach of most of DH projects. Thus
other options—such as caching, indexing, NoSQL databases, or various other
data-related optimisation techniques—must be used in order to develop technical
solutions that allow for interactivity while supporting a relatively low cost
hardware solution.

These visualisations have begun to offer tantalising new insights into the
corpus, providing a third way beyond search and browse. This paper will explore
both the visualisations themselves, their strengths and weaknesses within the
context of a corpus of the middle distance, as well as the novel readings they
enable. The paper will conclude by discussing how interactive visualisations
such as these can augment traditional modalities of interaction through a rich
toolset for research and exploration.

