The Tasso in Music Project:

A Digital Edition of the

Musical Settings of Torquato Tasso's Poetry, ca. 1570-1640

Emiliano Ricciardi

ericciardi@music.umass.edu

UMass Amherst, United States of America

The Tasso in Music Project, currently funded by an NEH Scholarly Editions Grant
(2016-2019), is an open-access and interactive digital platform that
allows music historians, performers, and literary scholars to access and
analyze late 16th- and early 17th-century settings of poetry by Torquato Tasso,
arguably the most prominent literary figure of early modern Italy. The project
has been realized by a team of scholars from North America and Europe, with the
technical support of Stanford University's Center for Computer Assisted
Research in the Humanities (CCARH) and UMass Amherst. Upon its completion, the
Tasso in Music Project aims to provide upon critical editions of the about 650
extant musical settings of Tasso's poetry, the vast majority of which have
never been edited before. These settings represent the work of over 100
composers from a variety of geographic areas and with different musical styles,
and as such provide a snapshot of secular vocal music in an age in which it
underwent profound transformations. In

addition, these settings shed light on Tasso's

extraordinary influence on the music of his time- an aspect of his reception
that has received surprisingly little attention to date.

The editions, which constitute one of the largest digital repositories of
Italian madrigals and related genres, are encoded with Humdrum software
tailored specifically for the project by Stanford's CCARH. The editions are
presented on the project's website in a variety of electronic formats, such as
MEI, MuseData, MusicXML, MIDI, and PDF, among others. They can also be
visualized online using Verovio, a recently developed SVG viewer for music
encodings. The editions are accompanied by dynamic, in-score critical notes and
by music and textual search tools developed by Stanford's CCARH that facilitate
analysis of this repertoire. Some of these search tools- such as single pitch
and melodic or rhythmic pattern- draw on CCARH's work for the Josquin Research
Project, a platform for the analysis of Renaissance music that has received
wide recognition in the early music community. Other tools are unique to the
project, including those that allow users to run combined musical/textual and
vertical sonority searches that are crucial for the study of this particular
repertoire.

The platform also features a substantial textual component, with TEI
transcriptions of the poetic texts as they appear in the musical settings and
in contemporaneous literary sources, both manuscript and printed. The textual
apparatus allows for a dynamic visualization of literary variants,
thus facilitating the collation of different sources. Thanks to this feature,
the project will become an indispensable resource for literary scholars
interested in the tradition and transmission of Tasso's poetry, as well as for
music historians interested in tracking the literary sources from which
composers may have drawn the texts they set to music.

The Tasso in Music Project addresses an interdisciplinary audience, bringing
together two institutions invested in the development of digital platforms for
musical and humanistic research as well as a group of scholars from the North
America and Europe who form the project's editorial and advisory boards. As
such, the project may serve as a model for institutional cooperation, opening
avenues for interdisciplinary approaches to the creation of digital databases
of music and poetry from the late Renaissance and early Baroque periods.

