Photogrammar and the

Federal Writer's Project:

A Model for Teaching Data and Mapping Rhetoric

Courtney Rivard

crivard@email.unc.edu

University of North Carolina Chapel Hill

United States of America

Laura Wexler

laura.wexler@yale.edu

Yale University, United States of America

In a poster session “Photogrammar and the Federal Writer's Project: A Model for
Teaching Data and Mapping Rhetoric,” we outline the use of some of
the educational opportunities we have discovered in using

large Digital Humanities projects to create

collaborative partnership pedagogies to teach students digital rhetoric. In
this approach, students become

project managers serving the needs of a real world research client - Yale
University, the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill and the University
of Richmond's collaborative Photogrammar team.

Bringing together pedagogical theories in Composition and Rhetoric that stress
the importance of understanding the role of rhetoric in the construction of
digital texts (Sayers, Sample, Galloway) and strategies for equitable
collaborative practices in Digital Humanities (Posner and AlgeeHewitt), we
teach students to “critically make data” by becoming project leaders tasked
with textual mark-up and metadata creation using digitized archival documents.
As team leaders, students must think through key rhetorical issues involving
naming practices, organizational practices, and user interface and access with
a mind toward both historical authenticity and greater inclusion. In this way,
they participate robustly in contemporary real world debates about civility,
discourse, history and accountability in naming persons, events and
things. Therefore, this pedagogical approach opens access into the center of
current pedagogical and historical concerns.

The Photogrammar project brings together photographs by the Farm Security
Administration taken during the Great Depression and World War II with life
histories created through Federal Writers' Project. The new tools currently in
development will offer users the opportunity to search and map both the visual
and textual histories of the Great Depression in relation to each other. These
life histories hold great historical significance as they mark an
important precursor to the development of oral history methodology by
collecting the histories of people who were previously excluded from the
historical record, including women, the working class, and African Americans
(Couch, Hirsch, Penkower). Since they will function in some sense as extended
captions to the FSA/OWI photographs, adding the life histories also touches
upon important issues in the history and criticism of visual culture.
Additionally, they hold linguistic keys to racial, gender, class, sexuality
and location classification patterns of the time that the photographs alone may
not expose. Ethical as well as methodological issues in bringing buried
histories to light vividly arise.

Applying collaborative partnership pedagogies in an undergraduate course in
Composition, Rhetoric and Digital Literacy at the University of North
Carolina that had no prerequisites, students were tasked to create a metadata
schema for the life histories to be added to Photogrammar, using TEI to create
rules for encoding the text. Because most students entered the class with
little technological or collaborative skills, the course places students in
small working groups and used Trello (project management software) to organize
work flows for lower stake exercises designed to address larger theoretical
issues in digital rhetoric (Eyman, Hart-Davidson, Ridolfo). These small stakes
activities helped students develop the skills necessary to tackle the larger
project that required them to work through critical issues of power stemming
from the task of making archival material from the 1930's useful in a digital
setting today. For instance, some of the language used to classify
racial groups in the FSA and the Federal Workers Project is off-putting, or
even offensive today. Students had to come to consensus on such difficult
issues because the project required that they present (via skype)
their rationale for the metadata schema to a Photogrammar Co-Director. The
Co-Director then gave feedback, which students used to write their schema
rationale within the TEI of the archival documents. Their decisions did an
excellent job of balancing the need to maintain the historical authenticity of
the documents while using technology in the service of great inclusion and
social justice are now used as the template for the

entire life histories collection. Therefore, they not only learned crucial
transferable digital skills, but also were given the ability to contribute
materially to how the historical record is produced.

Based on the students' work, it will be possible to map the movement of
interviewers, trace the prevalence of important issues of the time such
as sharecropping, women's labor, WPA work, and mill work, and generate
comparative analyzes of rhetoric used via specific interviewer practices. This
project highlights the new kinds of classroom as well as scholarly
opportunities that arise when rhetorical questions and insights begin to allow
students to direct and inflect the further development and buildout process of
an established DH site.

