“My Name is Lizzie Bennet”: Reading, Participation, and Jane Austen Across
Media Platforms

Meredith Dabek

meredith.dabek@nuim.ie

Maynooth University, Ireland

The Lizzie Bennet Diaries is a digital update of Jane Austen's novel, Pride and
Prejudice, in which Austen's narrative is reimagined for the twenty-first
century through its distribution across multiple media platforms. The Lizzie
Bennet Diaries (hereafter referred to as LBD) is centred on a series of YouTube
video diaries by Lizzie Bennet and includes four complementary YouTube
channels, thirteen interconnected Twitter feeds, Tumblr posts, Facebook
profiles, and numerous social media interactions and ‘conversations' between
the narrative's characters and its readers.

This poster expands upon existing research conducted as part of a larger,
ongoing PhD research project. It will present a visual overview of LBD and the
specific modes of participation available to readers during the narrative's
initial release in 2012 and 2013 (an important distinction, since the narrative
was originally released as a serial story). Drawing from a sample of LBD reader
comments on YouTube and Twitter (using MaxQDA to qualitatively code
the comments), the poster will explore how readers participated in the LBD
narrative and how their participation may have influenced or affected their
reading habits. In addition, Aarseth's cybertext theory and McGann's radial
reading theory will provide a foundation for discussing LBD's participatory
elements in a theoretical context, with an emphasis on discussing how digital
media have invited us to revisit and rework those theories.

According to Aarseth, cybertexts such as LBD invite and encourage readers to
make deliberate and intentional choices as they navigate through the text, its
multiple entry points, and its various narrative paths (1997). As a result,
readers actively participate in shaping their individual reading experience.
Thus, LBD reader must decide which elements of the narrative to consume, and in
which order: does she choose to follow Lizzie on Twitter, but not Darcy? Does
she watch Lydia's YouTube videos, or reblog Jane's fashion posts on Tumblr?
Each choice leads the reader in a slightly different direction in the
narrative, and provides additional information that offers context and meaning
to the core series of YouTube videos. The choices made by readers are also
indicative of McGann's theory of radial reading, where readers seek out
additional information not immediately available in the core text (McGann
1991). The various modes of participation available to LBD readers, as well as
the degree of interactivity implied by cybertext theory and radial reading,
gives readers an avenue for active engagement with the narrative and helps
reinforce the belief that their contributions to the narrative matter. This
belief, what Professor Stephen Coleman calls “the feeling of being counted,
or the affective character of an experience that renders it fulfilling for
individuals” (2013), serves to strengthen a reader's engagement with the text.

Using Aarseth and McGann's theories as a foundation, the poster will consider
how LBD's modes of participation might strengthen a reader's engagement with
and immersion in the text, and whether immersive digital narratives like LBD
can encourage engagement with traditional close reading techniques by prompting
individuals to read (or re-read) Austen's original Pride and Prejudice novel.
As Frank Rose, Henry Jenkins and others have pointed out, the Internet has
changed readers' expectations from stories and narratives, to the point that
many readers of digital narratives now expect some level of participation or
interactivity. This poster (and the larger research project) is focused on
exploring those participatory elements and their connection to overall digital
reading practices.

