Personality and Politics: Myers-Briggs Personality Types on Twitter in the
US 2016 Presidential Election

Patrick Juola

juola@mathcs.duq.edu

Duquesne University, United States of America

Sean Vinsick

sean.vinsick@gmail.com

Duquesne University, United States of America

As a social media platform, Twitter (twitter.com) offers opportunities to
examine public reactions in what could be described as the world's largest
village square. Twitter provides an opportunity not only to participate in
public discourse, but even to shape it. However, to fully understand this
discourse, it is helpful to understand the people behind the
discourse. Stylometric authorship profiling (Argamon, et al, 2009) provides an
example of this. People are free to post their opinions, but by analyzing the
writing style of the individual tweets, we can infer other attributes of the
individual authors.

In this study, we infer personality categories using the well-known
Myers-Briggs Type Inventory (MBTI) to analyze whether or not there are any
differences between the supporters (and detractors) of the major party
candidates, Hillary Clinton (D) and Donald Trump (R). The MBTI categorizes
people along four major axes, as encoded in a four-character summary (for
example, ENFJ: Extroverted, iNtuitive, Feeling, Judging). We have shown (Gray
and Juola, 2011; Juola et al., 2013) that personality can be inferred with
high accuracy from writing, and further that MBTI personality types can be
gleaned specifically from Twitter feeds. Using The EthosIO system developed by
Juola & Associates (www.ethosio.com), we have applied this (Juola, Vinsick, and
Ryan, 2016) to large-scale analyses of the demographics of personality on
Twitter, finding substantial differences between the accepted distribution of
personality in the general US population and between the distribution of
personality among active Twitter participants. For example, introverts make
up approximately 50% of the general US population, but nearly 80% of active
Twitter users. Similarly, nearly 3/5 of the general US population are "sensing"
(S) [as opposed to "intuitive" (N)], but half or fewer Twitter users are. Two
specific subgroups, INFP and INFJ, are vastly overrepresented on Twitter, being
only about 5% of the overall US population, but 30% or more of the samples
gleaned from Twitter.

We extend this to analyzing personality differences between politically
disparate groups of Twitter participants. As with (Juola, Vinsick, and Ryan,
2016), we harvested a large group of user names from the Twitter sample feed,
selecting users whose public tweets included one of several political hashtags.
Based on the hashtags seen, we divided participants into four groups:
anti-Clinton (identified by one or more of

'#NeverHillary', '#CrookedHillary', '#WhichHillary', '#DraftOurDaughters', '#
hillary4prison', '#hil-lary4prison2016', '#StopHillary', '#CrimeWithHer', or '#
Killary'); pro-Clinton ('#ImWithHer', '#Clinton', '#ClintonKaine16', '#
ClintonKaine2016', '#Hil-laryClinton'], '#ClintonKaine', '#WhyIWantHillary', '#
HillarysArmy', or '#Hillary2016'); anti-Trump ('#NeverTrump', '#dumptrump', '#
trumptaxreturns', '#dontvotefortrump', '#dumpthetrump', '#boy-cotttrump', '#
trumpsexism'); and pro-Trump ('#Im-WithYou', '#TrumpTrain', '#
MakeAmericaGreatA-gain', '#TrumpPence16', '#TrumpPence2016', '#Trump', '#
AltRight', '#VoteTrump', '#TeamTrump') This gave us approximately 600 user
names for each of the four groups in our preliminary dataset. These user names
were submitted to the EthosIO personality analyzer to produce distributional
data for each subgroups.

We therefore had in our preliminary corpus 651 pro-Clinton subjects, 587
pro-Trump subjects, 635 anti-Clinton subjects and 639 anti-Trump subjects,
for a total of 2512 total user names, divided across 16 MBTI categories
(details in full paper). As expected from previous work, the overall statistics
do not match US demographics; for example, types ISFP and INFP are strongly
overrepresented in all samples, as are introverts in general. Our interest,
however, is in whether or not political differences also show up as personality
differences as well. In plainer language, does the average Clinton supporter
have a different personality than the average Trump supporter?

We tested this hypothesis with a variety of chi-squared tests (df=15
throughout). At the most basic

level, we found extremely significant differences (p ~

10^A-9) between Clinton supporters and Trump supporters. We also found
significant differences (p ~ 10^A-12) between "Democrats" (either pro-Clinton
or anti-Trump) and "Republicans" (pro-Trump and antiClinton). Examining cells
in detail suggest that ISFJ and ISFP are both overrepresented among
Democrats while ESTJs and INFJs are overrepresented among Republicans.

By contrast, there was no significant difference (p > 0.10) between "Anti" and
"Pro" subjects, despite the possible participation, for example, of third party
supporters who are opposed to both Trump and Clinton. Similarly, we found no
significant difference between pro-Trump and anti-Clinton subjects, or between
antiTrump and pro-Clinton subjects, suggesting that other factors than
personality are affecting whether a person chooses to self-express in favor of
a particular candidate or in opposition to that candidate's rival(s).

In this study, there are a number of potential confounding factors, the effects
of which have not yet been assessed. The first is simply the presence of active
attempts to manipulate the dialogue, for example, through the use of automated
'bots' (Kollanyi, Howard, and Wolley, 2016), or simply through the use of
"sock puppets," multiple identities in an attempt to create a an appearance of
consensus and of larger margins. A second factor is the issue of overlapping
categories. Approximately 20% of our preliminary "anti-Trump" sample also
self-identified as "pro-Clinton," and similarly, approximately 20% of the
anti-Clinton sample self-identified as pro-Trump. More counterintuitively,
approximately 5% of the anti-Clinton sample also identified as anti-Trump, and
approximately 5% of the pro-Clinton sample was also pro-Trump. This may be due
to a third confounding factor, the inability of simple keyword spotting to
identify the use of irony (for example, in posting a link to an article highly
critical of Trump's campaign and using the '#Trump' hashtag to draw attention
to it). As we continue this analysis, based in part on data to be collected
during the final and most intense week of the campaign, we will address these
issues (and discuss our methods of address in the final paper).

We have therefore shown, using text analysis of Twitter on a moderately large
scale, that there are significant differences between the types of people
who self-identify as supporters (and opponents) of one of the major candidates
in the 2016 US presidential election. We have also shown that there does not
appear to be significant personality-related differences between whether one
supports one's chosen candidate or opposes the other one. We have also
confirmed the previous results (Juola, Vinsick, and Ryan, 2016) about the
general distribution of personality types on Twitter, and hasten to point out
that the differences we have identified are still relatively minor and that
the overall distribution of personality types in both camps are broadly similar
to the distribution of personality types on Twitter in general. However, our
results show, first, that, in keeping with prior work, inferring personality
type via Twitter is practical and useful. Second, they show that personality
may play a factor in the selection of one's chosen candidate.

Finally, the question of "who are Trump's voters?" against "who are Clinton's
voters?" will no doubt interest historians for decades. Our results provide
some insight into possible psychological motivations in addition to the more
traditional social, political, and economics reasons, and may therefore enrich
future discussion and scholarship.

Nota bene

This version of the paper was written approximately one week before the actual
2016 election and will be updated as appropriate.

