Introducing the Open Online Newspaper Initiative

Jessica Dussault

jdussault@unl.edu

University of Nebraska, United States of America

Laura Weakly

lweakly2@unl.edu

University of Nebraska, United States of America

Karin Dalziel

kdalziel2@unl.edu

University of Nebraska, United States of America

Jeremy Echols

jechols@uoregon.edu

University of Oregon, United States of America

Karen Estlund

kme20@psu.edu

Pennsylvania State University

United States of America

Andrew Gearhart

andrew@psu.edu

Pennsylvania State University

United States of America

Sheila Rabun

srabun@clir.org

IIIF Consortium, United States of America

Greg Tunink

techgique@unl.edu

University of Nebraska, United States of America

The Open Online Newspaper Initiative (Open ONI) is an open source collaboration
whose goal is to lower the entrance bar for libraries, archives,
historical societies, and other cultural heritage institutions to display
digital newspaper content. Open ONI was formed in response to a need for free,
easily deployed, flexible, plug-and-play software that is useful
for collections large and small, local and national.

Open ONI's code base was forked from the Library of Congress newspaper
application, chronam (Library of Congress, 2016a). chronam was created to
support the National Digital Newspaper Program (NDNP), a national project
supported by the Library of Congress and the National Endowment for the
Humanities, which seeks to digitize and add titles to a searchable, online
collection at Chronicling America (Library of Congress, 2016d; 2016b). State
entities often have newspaper content which they are unable to put online
through Chronicling America and must seek a different solution to present their
digitized periodicals (Library of Congress, 2016c; Center for
Research Libraries Global Resources Network, 2015). The Library of Congress
released the source code for chronam to help address this problem. The
software currently available on GitHub requires skilled technical staff to
customize the application and update related code packages, which can be a
barrier for small institutions. Open ONI was born in 2015 when a group of
librarians, project managers, and developers working on their own chronam
installations gathered to discuss a friendly fork of the software. In
the process of setting up, deploying, and customizing chronam for their own
newspaper sites, Open ONI members had identified many shared interests,
from fixing common bugs to building new features, and decided that pooling
their resources and efforts to develop an application to fit the majority of
their needs would benefit them all. Though we are currently working towards
meeting our own implementation goals, we are keeping in mind how this might
be applicable to others in the future.

Since beginning the initiative, Open ONI developers have made substantial
changes and improvements to the initial chronam code. The web framework,
Django, has been updated to the latest long term support version, and many
supporting libraries and command line tools have been updated or replaced,
when existing libraries and tools were deprecated or no longer available.
Perhaps the largest improvement is the incorporation of the RAIS image server,
an International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) compliant image server
developed by the University of Oregon Library to deliver JP2s nearly as fast as
chronam delivered TIFFs, but using a fraction of the RAM (Echols and Krech,
2016). RAIS is a 100% open source alternative to other JP2 image servers. With
contributions from the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
(MITH) at the University of Maryland, and sponsored by the IIIF-Consortium,
Open ONI offers IIIF compatible URLs to allow the substitution of other image
servers. Beyond existing interoperability formats such as MARC and linked data,
future plans could include IIIF manifests and other metadata formats/downloads,
depending on developer time. Open ONI's developer environment relies on Docker
containers to separate the different components of the software and provide a
one-line setup command. The application is configurable through settings files
and personalizable, with a default theme that users may copy to get started on
their own look and feel. Additionally, Open ONI offers several plugins that
users can incorporate into their site such as featured content, randomly
selected newspaper pages, and a customizable map. A recent feature allows for
defining copyright statements by publication and date range, and showing
these statements directly below each page.

Open ONI

ie Newspapers About API Browse by Date Help    Advanced Search

Welcome to the Open Online Newspapers Initiative

Ipsum rutrum orci, sagittis tempus lacus enlm ac dui. Donee non enirn In turpls
pulvlnar facilisls. Ut felis. Praesent dapibus, ñeque id cursus faucibus,
tortor ñeque egestas augue, eu vulputate magna eras eu erat. Aliquam erat
volutpat. Nam dui ml, tlncldunt quis, accumsan porttitor, facilisls luctus,
metus Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada
fames ac turpis egestas. Vestlbulum tortor quam, feugiat vitae, ultricies eget,
tempor sit amet, ante. Donee eu libero sit amet quam egestas semper. Aenean
ultricies ml vitae est. Mauris placerat eleifend leo. Quisque sit amet est et
sapien ullamcorper pharetra. Vestibulum erat wisi, condlmentum sed, commodo
vitae, ornare sit amet, wlsi. Aenean fermentum, elit eget tinciduit
condlmentum, eras Ipsum rutrum orci, sagittis tempus lacus enlm ac dui. Donee
non enlm in turpls pulvlnar facilisls. Ut fells. Praesent dapibus, ñeque id
cursus faucibus, tortor ñeque egestas augue, eu vulputate magna eras eu erat.
Aliquam erat volutpat. Nam dui ml, tlncldunt quis, accumsan porttltor,
facilisls luctus, metus

Open ONI

Site created using open-oni software, built off the Library of Congress's 
chronam.

Three states have plans to redeploy their newspaper sites with Open ONI in
2017: The University of Nebraska, University of Oregon, and Penn State
University. Features that will be developed before all three launch their sites
include extending the advanced search features for pages and newspaper titles,
reinforcing the current test suite, updating the search engine from Solr 4 to
Solr 6, and developing documentation to help organizations migrate from chronam
to Open ONI.

Our poster will cover the above improvements of Open ONI, as well as the road
map for future work. We will also have an instance of Open ONI available at
the conference which will demonstrate the speed of the RAIS image server for
JPG 2000s, default theme, new advanced search, and plugins. We hope that Open
ONI offers organizations with newspaper collections of all types a reliable and
customizable option for presenting and searching their collections. This
poster presentation is also outreach to gain support and input from the
archives, library, historical society, developer communities and others.

Center for Research Libraries Global Resources Network (2015). The ‘State of
the Art': A Comparative Analysis of Newspaper Digitization to Date. https://
www.crl.edu/sites/default/files/d6/attachmen ts/events/
ICON_Report-State_of_Digitization_final.pdf (accessed 24 October 2016).

Echols, J. and Krech, D. (2016). "RAIS Image Server." GitHub.    https://
github.com/uoregon-libraries/rais-

image-server (accessed 24 October 2016).

Library of Congress (2016a). "chronam." GitHub. https://github.com/
LibraryOfCongress/chronam (accessed 11 October 2016)

Library of Congress (2016b). "Chronicling America." http://
chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/ (accessed 24 October 2016).

Library of Congress (2016c). “Content Selection.” http: //www.loc.gov/ndnp/
guidelines/selection.html (accessed 24 October 2016)

Library of Congress (2016d). "National Digital Newspaper Program." http://
www.loc.gov/ndnp/ (accessed 24 October 2016).

Open Online Newspaper Initiative (2016). "Open ONI."

GitHub.    https: / / github.com / open-oni/open-oni

(accessed 11 October 2016).

