Designing from a Narrative: Leveraging the 6 Point Story Method to
Facilitate Interaction Design in Digital Humanities Projects

Shane McGarry

shane.mcgarry.2015@mumail.ie

Maynooth University, Ireland

One of the many challenges facing Digital Humanities projects today is how to
design for alternative approaches to traditional close reading. Many of the
current interface mechanisms for representing text are drawn from their
print counterparts and are directly reflective of the analogue. These
mechanisms rely upon traditional representations of text and typically
structure content using techniques that have been leveraged by print
for several centuries. However, these various mechanisms are designed to
support traditional close reading techniques and often fail to consider digital
reading methods. As digital content has become more ubiquitous and commonplace,
a demographic shift has occurred, migrating readers towards alternative methods
of reading and engagement with text, alternatives which seek to augment the
traditional close reading approach. Previously conducted research shows a
decline in traditional close reading techniques when moving from print to
digital (Hayles, 2012; Mangen, 2008). This, along with other factors, has led
to the emergence of new methods of reading and textual engagement, such as
hyper reading, radial reading, and distant reading (Hayles, 2012; McGann, 2012;
Moretti, 2013). However, finding metaphors or interactions which support these
different modalities can be challenging, and the methods for discovering how
users leverage content can often be inconsistent.

In an effort to increase user experience within the Digital Humanities space,
the field has turned to interaction design techniques in order to
better understand how the user leverages these types of projects (Ruecker et
al, 2011; Pierazzo, 2014). Traditionally, interaction design has borrowed
from social science in an effort to create focus groups or usability studies
which provide insight into how the user interacts with the software in
question. Various techniques—such as ethnography, surveys, and interviews—are
often leveraged with the goal of understanding how the individual engages with
the software. However, these techniques typically fail to consider why the user
may engage with the software in question. This assessment, otherwise known as
the “emotional impact” of the software, can have tremendous impact upon the
reader’s interaction with the content. Studies have shown that the
subjective experience often has a strong impact upon metacognition (Ackerman &
Goldsmith, 2011), leading readers to demand more than just efficiency
and usability from a platform: they also require emotional engagement (Shih and
Liu, 2008). This poster proposes the “6 Point Story Method” as a
framework which can be used to assess not only how the reader seeks to interact
with the content but also why.

The “6 Point Story Method” is a psychological method developed by Alida Gersie.
The method is primarily used by psychologists as a therapy modality to assist
patients by framing stories which often have subconscious meaning and acting as
an assistant to uncover issues requiring further therapeutic intervention
(Dent-Brown and Wang, 2004). This poster proposes that this method can be
adopted for use in the early stages of interaction design with the goal of
facilitating idea generation in a group setting in order to further understand:
the goals of end users, what challenges the users may face when navigating
a software system, and the driving motivation behind the use of the platform
(thus forming the emotional component of the analysis). This poster will
discuss the use of the 6 Point Story Method within a focus group setting whose
primary goal is to further explore how users wish to engage with Digital
Humanities projects from non-traditional engagement methods (e.g. in support of
reading modalities outside of traditional close reading). The methodology,
including the demographics behind the focus groups, will be illustrated and the
results will be explored in order to highlight the advantages of adapting the 6
Point Story Method to support traditional interaction design techniques.

