Negotiating Sustainability: The Grant Services “Menu” at UVic Libraries

Lisa Goddard

lgoddard@uvic.ca

University of Victoria, Canada

Christine Walde

cwalde@uvic.ca

University of Victoria, Canada

Brief summary

This paper provides a brief overview of library best practices for digital
curation, with particular attention to the areas that highlight disciplinary
tensions between library science and the humanities. The authors introduce the
University of Victoria’s grant service “menu” for digital preservation and
hosting services, and outline some of the most promising models for balancing
creativity with sustainability in DH project design. We will suggest roles for
libraries, researchers, administrators, and funders in helping to create
technical and social conditions that nurture sustainable research projects in
the digital humanities and beyond.

Abstract

Knowledge building is an iterative process that refines and extends previous
research. Through citation, we acknowledge our debt to scholars and theorists
whose work enables our own. The ephemeral nature of the digital world threatens
to destabilize a centuries long system of scholarly communication and knowledge
sharing. In a print ecosystem many immutable copies of an object
are distributed globally and are curated by network of organizations. In the
digital world a single copy of an object is served from a central location.
Digital content is thus susceptible to manipulation, corruption, and erasure.
The key to analog preservation is to ensure that artefacts remain the same.
Digital preservation, in contrast, requires “active management”
comprising constant changes, patches, and updates. Objects become quickly
obsolete as the environments around them change.

Funding agencies are putting increased pressure on researchers to include
sustainability plans in funding applications (NEH 2016, SSHRC
2016). Researchers often turn to the University Library to provide preservation
solutions for digital projects without fully understanding the technical,
policy, and funding implications of these requests. Libraries have made
significant strides in planning for the long-term preservation of the many
thousands of digital objects in our collections. Digitization projects adhere
to strict standards for resolution, colour management, and file formats (FADGI
2016). Digital asset management systems like Hydra/Fedora provide a single
place to store objects along with descriptive and administrative metadata that
helps to determine the preservation actions that should be taken against
each object (Goddard, 2016). Those actions include auditing and bit-checking of
file systems to ensure against data loss, format migrations as media and
file types become obsolete, replication of objects across different technology
stacks and jurisdictions, and discovery interfaces that ensure
continued discoverability and access. Libraries are building national networks
that will allow us to replicate data across multiple jurisdictions to mitigate
against disasters both natural and human (DPN 2016, Canadiana 2016, CARL 2016).
Despite concerted efforts, only a handful of library repositories have so far
met the stringent conditions that are necessary for certification as a Trusted
Digital Repository, which requires technical and policy elements including
plans for long term staffing and funding, and contingency plans in the event of
organizational failure (CRL, 2015). Ultimately, libraries still can’t make
guarantees about preservation for digital objects in our own collections, even
those that are subject to internationally recognized best practices.
This problem is compounded when DH research projects fail to adhere to adequate
quality standards for objects (e.g. images, texts, video, maps, mark-up) and
overlook established metadata models and vocabularies.

To this point we have outlined the challenges of curating fairly static digital
files, but most DH projects are far more than the sum of their digital objects.
Many DH research projects are complex software stacks with many layers of
tools, objects, code and dependencies. If a project is built on Drupal,
for example, librarians will have to not only maintain all of the unique
objects and code produced by the project, but they are also committed to
maintaining a specific version of a rapidly evolving software platform -- a
version that will likely be obsolete before the project concludes. Drupal is,
at the very least, well documented and widely deployed. Many DH projects also
include custom-built tools, the inner workings of which are known only to a
handful of people on the research team. The complex technology profiles
of contemporary DH projects require ongoing active management including
patching, tending, and rebuilding over time (Burpee, 2015). While the
library may have sufficient resources to steward one or two unique project
environments, this approach cannot scale to hundreds or even thousands of
projects over time. In the current technical and funding environment is simply
not possible for libraries to provide high-level curation for the enormous
variety of funded digital projects that are produced by researchers within
their organizations.

Libraries alone will not solve the problem of sustainability in DH projects. A
fundamental characteristic of sustainability is that it must be established as
a key design principle from the outset. It is almost impossible to
retroactively render a project sustainable without rebuilding from the ground
up. Initial choices about technologies, data models, formats, and documentation
will influence the likelihood that a project will still be accessible in
a decade. One complicating factor is that sustainability is largely at odds
with a researcher’s freedom of choice when it comes to decisions about
platforms, tools, and data models. Truly sustainable DH projects will require a
level of standardization that is far from the current norm in DH project
development, and which is unlikely to be unequivocally embraced by
humanists. Research is an experimental process, and technological constraints
can stifle creativity and independence of action. Models, by their very
nature, seek to simplify, while the humanist tradition revels in nuance and
complexity (McCarty, 2005; Quamen, 2013).

Leslie Johnston from the Library of Congress suggests that libraries can pursue
two models for preserving complex DH projects. The first approach is to
“preserve the content but forgo the look and feel. This is often extremely
unpopular.” The second is to “preserve the content and the look and feel
exactly as they were implemented. This is often close to impossible.” (Johnson,
2013) The tension between these two models is where libraries, researchers,
and funders need to more clearly outline our assumptions and expectations.

The University of Victoria Libraries have developed a suite of preservation
services for grant funded projects in order to plainly articulate
our competencies, assets, and constraints (Goddard and Walde, 2017). This
document acts as kind of a “menu” of services from which researchers can select
as they develop their grant applications. These include the use of our Hydra/
Fedora4 digital asset management system, metadata expertise that extends
to consultations around interoperability and linked data, web hosting and
discovery, exhibit building software, copyright consultation, open access
publishing, research data management, and digitization services. We provide
template paragraphs related to sustainability, preservation, open access,
and knowledge mobilization that researchers can easily repurpose for any given
funding proposal. We include a break down of the in-kind value of each of
these services, along with any costs that will be charged back, so that
researchers can easily estimate the value of the institutional commitment. We
hope that this approach will enable critical conversations about sustainability
to happen during the grant writing process, rather than towards the end of
funding cycles as has been too often the case in the past. In order to offer
our “gold standard” preservation services libraries will have to be involved in
early conversations about technology preferences and data models. We certainly
don’t assume that all decisions will be dictated by curation needs, but rather
that our consultation will enable researchers to make cleareyed decisions about
the impact of their choices on sustainability.

The preservation “menu” is an appealing model for researchers, as it enables
them to quickly understand the variety of services and in-kind contributions
that the library can offer in order to strengthen a funding application. There
are also advantages to the library. By tying preservation services to grant
funded projects we can avail of a rigorous review process that helps us to
direct library resources towards research that has been deemed valuable by a
network of disciplinary experts. It provides an easy formula for calculating
in-kind contributions for letters of support, and to some extent standardizes
the process of writing those letters. It helps to promote librarians
as desirable co-applicants and collaborators on funding applications. It
underscores to administrators the library’s value as a university research
support. This model also provides mechanisms whereby grant funds can flow back
into the development of new features for the library’s digital asset management
and publishing platforms.

Susan Brown notes that “successful technologies rely on social resources.”
(Brown, 2016) Part of our challenge is to muster support from
researchers, librarians, administrators, and funders to create optimal
conditions for long-term digital curation. The conversation about long-term
preservation will be an ongoing negotiation that bridges different
disciplinary perspectives, and balances ideals with resource constraints. Just
as the traditional model of scholarly print publishing has shaped the means of
scholarly production through the last two centuries, these conversations will
ultimately will help to shape the future of humanities research platforms,
resources, and methodologies.

