Opening up the Oxford English Dictionary: what an enhanced legacy dataset
can tell us about language, lexicography, and literature

David-Antoine Williams

david.williams@utwaterloo.ca

St Jerome’s University in the University of Waterloo Canada

Overview

This paper will discuss recent research carried out in the context of an
OMRI-funded project: “The Life of Words: Poetry and the OED.” It will discuss
the processes and methods developed for enhancing and manipulating a large
legacy dataset—the Second Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary—and
will present analyses and applications pertaining to lexicography, lexicology,
and traditional literary studies. Styled as an “opening up” of latent
information in a previously closed system, and with implications in digital
humanities, linguistics, lexicography, lexicology, literary criticism, and
poetics, the paper will address the conference theme of “Access” in the sense
of tapping into knowledge that has previously been inaccessible.

Context

The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) is widely considered to be the greatest
philological and lexicographical achievement in English. As the first fascicles
of the OED were being prepared, editor James Murray professed his dedication to
“The perfection of the Dictionary in its data” (1880: 129, orig. emph.).
The “data” of the work is its 2.43 million quotations, a significant portion of
them from poetic and other literary texts, which both shape and illustrate
the various sense definitions of roughly 600,000 English words and word forms.
Conversely, since its publication, poets have relied on the OED to guide their
deployments and arrangements of English words in poems. This reciprocal
intertextuality has led to two striking facts which have yet to be fully
explored: 1) that the OED’s definitions of English words depend to a
significant degree on poetic language, which is striking because by any
standard account, poetic usage tends away from the denotative or definitional
and towards the connotative and metaphorical; and 2) that much English poetry
of the last hundred years contains a philological, etymological,
and lexicographical dimension, informed by the OED.

Although the Second Edition of the OED (Murray et al., 1989) was among the
first large reference works to be prepared for public and academic communities
in digitized, marked-up form, and despite the current and ongoing revision of
the dictionary (Simpson et. al., 2000-), no version has ever been marked-up
with additional metadata. Information we might expect to find in a modern text
dataset, such as author gender, genre of quotation, and type of publication, is
not included in the OED. Attempts to incorporate such information into studies
of linguistic, literary and cultural questions have until now have therefore
been limited to “case-study” or “sampling” methodologies.

“The Life of Words: Poetry and the OED” addresses this by working directly with
legacy versions of the electronic OED, enhancing these with
appropriate metadata about the quotation evidence. With the enhanced dataset,
alongside modern large text corpora, we then generate quantitative and
qualitative assessments in two broad fields of inquiry: 1) What has been the
influence of poetry on the English language’s most comprehensive
lexicographical work? and 2) What influence has the OED had on English-language
poetry? To take a modern turn on Murray, our concern now is the perfection of
the dictionary in its data, metadata, and comparative data.

Paper Outline

The preamble to this paper will briefly introduce the project, discussing its
background, methods employed, and current stage of development, and offering
some observations regarding the use of dictionaries in general, the OED in
particular, and specifically the “opened-up”, marked-up and directly accessible
enhanced OED, as “evidence” for interpretation in a number of scholarly
domains, a methodological topic which has received recent attention in
dictionary studies, literary studies, and linguistics (e.g. Coleman 2013a,
2013b; Coleman and Ogilvie 2009; Hoffman 2004). The bulk of the presentation
will be devoted to an exploration of the enhanced OED, demonstrating some
top-level findings relevant to current scholarship in three fields. In
the history of lexicography, recently there has been much discussion on the
interpretation of OED quotation evidence as a complex indicator of both the
prestige of certain kinds of writing over time, and the particular judgements,
biases, and practices of the nineteenth-century philologists who compiled the
First Edition (1884-1928) (Ogilvie 2013; Brewer 2012, 2010, 2009, 2007;
Considine 2009; Mugglestone 2005, 2000; Willinsky 1994). In the first main part
of the paper, I give an overall quantitative assessment of the generic make-up
of OED quotations, comparing the First and Second Editions, and discuss the
implications of this for literary and for cultural history. Next, at
the intersection of lexicology and literary studies, I offer a re-assessment of
claims surrounding the linguistic inventiveness of canonical authors such
as Shakespeare and Milton (Goodland 2011, 2010; Brewer 2013, Crystal 2000; Gray
1989; Schafer 1980) based on benchmarks for the period and genre of
their various works. Finally, in the realm of literary criticism, I demonstrate
a number of ways that information embedded in the OED can be harnessed
to detect literary tropes such as allusion and etymological wordplay, either in
poems that have been directly influenced by the OED, and those for which
the evidence is less conclusive.

