Livingstone Online: Access Beyond Openness

Megan Ward

megan.ward@oregonstate.edu

Oregon State University, United States of America

Adrian S. Wisnicki

awisnicki@yahoo.com

University of Nebraska - Lincoln,

United States of America

The study of nineteenth-century Africa is troubled by issues of access on two
fronts. First, explorers’ unedited field notes - the closest thing we have to
a “‘raw’ record” - are rarely available, and, if they are, they are often
crumbling, illegible, or located in far-flung archives (Bridges 1998). Second,
even when such sources are available in later published forms, they present
ethical and ideological problems. Written largely by European explorers and
heavily edited, the published texts often exclude the voices of the
very populations to which they attempt to provide access. Livingstone Online, a
digital project dedicated to the written and visual legacy of
nineteenth-century explorer David Livingstone (1813-73), works to counter these
issues through its site design, transcription processes, and use of spectral
imaging technology.

In order to do so, however, we have had to reconsider our understanding of
access, both technologically and ideologically. As a publicly-funded project,
we adhere to a high standard of transparency. Yet, as an archive of a
contentious figure of imperial exploration, we are also responsive to the
recent critiques of access - both of open access as privileging imperial
knowledge expansion (Christen 2012; Risam 2017) and of the digital humanities
as excluding consideration of race (Gallon 2016). To navigate this conflict, we
strive to provide access that is not simply based on openness.

Instead, our project offers an understanding of access that moves in two
directions temporally: striving to repair the past by being ethical in our
digital treatment and remediation of historical materials, while also acting in
a future-oriented fashion in developing and implementing our
transparency policies, data standards, and code of collaboration in order to
engage a variety of audiences, including those often excluded from DH practice.
In this way, our project attempts to create a digital platform for culturally
sensitive materials, while our documentation procedures seek to reveal every
step of our decision-making process to critical review. Reparative

Livingstone Online, now in its twelfth year (2004 present), is a digital museum
and library that draws on recent scholarship and international collaboration
to restore one of the British Empire's most iconic figures to his global
contexts. Our digital collection of highresolution manuscript images and
critically-edited transcriptions - 11,000 images and 700 transcriptions by 2017
- is among the largest on the internet related to any single historical British
visitor to Africa. Our site publishes important research on Livingstone's
legacy and explores the many ways his ideas have circulated over time.
Uniquely, we also takes its visitors far behind the scenes of our work -
documenting step-bystep the international collaboration among
archives, scholars, scientists, librarians, computer programmers, and other
specialists that has made our project possible.

Our use of spectral imaging to uncover the material history of Livingstone’s
manuscripts gives us important insights into the conditions under
which Livingstone and other imperial explorers wrote - from unacknowledged
contributors to the many environments through which the manuscripts circulated.
In foregrounding these dimensions, we are also creating a new approach to using
spectral imaging in cultural heritage projects because spectral imaging has
primarily been used to unearth layers of text, rather than to examine the
broader circumstances of imperial record-making and the preservation
of imperial records over time. This new use of spectral imaging also
constitutes an ethics of access, which is framed by critical essays that
explore Livingstone’s uncredited information sources. Livingstone Online here
puts forward an idea of access as uncovering the hidden hands and voices of the
past.

For instance, in our study of Livingstone’s 1871 Field Diary, we have
collaborated with spectral imaging scientists to develop pseudocolor (false
color) images to differentiate passages that Livingstone originally wrote from
those he added latter and those added by other hands. Likewise, the development
of animated spectral images has enabled a chronological reconstruction of
events in the life of the diary. By contrast, recourse to images made by
principal component analysis (PCA) has uncovered stains on pages otherwise
invisible to the naked eye and has introduced us to dimensions of manuscript
history otherwise not even suspected to exist.

In addition, we frame these spectral images with paratextual tools that value
equally the different kinds of information that Livingstone records. For
example, few or no other record remains of many of the villages or the African
and Arab individuals Livingstone mentions. As a result, our integrated glossary
offers unique, otherwise unavailable geographical information that circulated
during Livingstone's time in Central Africa and enumerates the names of
people that might otherwise be lost to history. The glossary and other critical
materials also provide insight into the complex social dynamics that operated
in areas where Livingstone traveled. Overall, Livingstone Online offers a
version of access in which the freely available manuscript pages are only a
starting point; spectral imaging technology combined with critical building
helps construct a reparative ethos of access.

[241-1]

Figure 1. A processed spectral image of a two-page spread from the 10 March
1870 'Retrospect' (Livingstone 1870a:[3]). The kaleidoscopic colors foreground
and differentiate the wide range of substances that have left traces on
the manuscript's pages over its 145-year history. Copyright National Library of
Scotland. Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported

Future-Oriented

Alongside such reparative work, we also strive to design a project that looks
toward the future. Livingstone Online makes our project documents available to
an almost unprecedented degree in order to make our publicly-funded research
fully accountable, to illuminate our work practices, and to support future
digital projects. Our extensive downloadable primary materials (including
12,000 images, 3000 metadata records, and hundreds of transcriptions) are
supplemented by freely available project materials, images, and working
documents -the things often hidden behind the public face of digital projects.
We have curated access to over 600 project documents, including planning
documents, spectral image processing information, and essay notes, in order to
illuminate the long-term history of our project work. Likewise, access to our
grant narratives and working documents de-mystifies funding processes and
international, interdisciplinary collaboration in order to support the work of
other scholars, especially junior or independent scholars and those new to DH.

In addition, our site is technically accessible in a range of ways. We have
built the site with sustainable, community-supported, open-source
technologies such as Drupal for our front end and Fedora for our back end,
which means that others can access our underlying code (which is fully
available from Github) to reuse and modify it for their own projects.
To promote use of our site more broadly, we've also worked to make the site
inviting to scholars and general users alike, using intuitive, visually-driven
site design. Through our site design, open-source code, and transparent
documentation, we hope to foster user-led interpretation over passive reception
of authorized knowledge.

LIVINGSTONE ONLINE

illuminating imperial exploration

[241-2]

Figures 2,3. Livingstone Online's six section pages, two of which are pictured
here, each rely on a diverse range of historical illustrations and contemporary
images to complicate the notion of a definitive Livingstone.

As part of this effort, our site is also fully mobile accessible, including for
complex functions such as the review and study of archival manuscripts
and transcriptions. This opens up Livingstone’s documents and our critical
materials to the parts of the world where he worked and travelled; for many
people on the African continent, for instance, mobile technology is the main
access point to the internet. Likewise, just under a quarter of our
collaborating archives are in Africa, and we are actively working on
developing additional relationships with African-based archives, in the
interests of not only bringing new Livingstone materials into our site, but
also to encourage collaboration with African-based scholars and
general audiences.

In these ways, we hope to initiate a conversation about the biases and
assumptions inherent in the ways that technological advances shape our
preservation of the past. We also hope to develop a nuanced practice of access
that is embedded in our site design, spectral imaging processing, and
transparent documentation, as well as made explicit in our critical
materials. Thinking of access beyond openness means creating more
historically-minded digital collections that also look to future knowledge
creation by an array of populations, not all of them academic or based in
the west.

