Finding ‘the Reader' in Literary Criticism and the Reception of Contemporary
Literature

Brian Johnsrud

johnsrud@stanford.edu

Stanford University

In literary studies, we often make assumptions about how texts and cultural
objects are received by readers and general audiences. But our evidence
for these claims is typically anecdotal or based on extrapolations from a
singular case-study: our own scholarly close readings. But can we assume
that general readers interpret and make meaning from texts in the same way
scholars do?

To address the current state of the “reader” in literary studies, I collected
all 1,410 articles published across a decade, 2004-2014, from three
leading journals of literary theory and criticism: American Literary History
(ALH), New Literary History (NLH), and The Proceedings of the Modern
Language Association (PMLA). I then narrowed the collection down to articles
primarily about literature (rather than drama, film, or theory, for instance),
such that 591 articles remained. This set was analyzed to discover how
frequently the verb “read” was used, and what authors meant by each use of
“read” (i.e. the literal act of reading or as a synonym for “interpretation”).
I also asked how often authors referred to a “reader,” and determined in
each instance if they were referring to an expert, academic reader or the
general audience of a literary work. In short, with the seemingly omnipresent
use of “reading” and “readers” in contemporary literary criticism, this study
asks what kind of reading is actually being described, and who exactly are
the communities of readers that literary critics invoke in published
scholarship?

In this talk, I share the results of this analysis. To suggest a new approach
for making empirical claims about reader reception, I then introduce new
methods for literary scholars interested in making claims about how readers and
audiences respond to literary texts.

With methodology drawn from qualitative coding analysis, which is often
employed in the social sciences, I hope to better understand how literary texts
facilitate meaning for readers. I designed Reader Study (www.readerstudy.com),
an open-source and web-based research platform to track how recruited study
participants read and respond to literary texts. The site guides study design
and gathers reader data in the form of pre-surveys, post-surveys, and
the highlights and annotations that readers create on texts.

In a pilot study using Reader Study, I recruited 24 first-time readers (ages
18-35) of the post-9/11 novel Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close. From
their readings, I was able to gather, qualitatively code (using the software
Dedoose), and analyze over 5,000 annotations that participants created
pertaining to the ways that the novel invokes 9/11 alongside the WWII bombings
of Hiroshima and Dresden. By gathering demographic data like gender, age, and
college major (along with post-reading survey and essay questions), I was able
to isolate actual—rather than theoretical or imagined—interpretive communities
and to see how their reactions to specific parts of the text contributed to
their overall reception of the novel, particularly how they empathized with
characters and engaged with the historical events mentioned in the plot. This
talk shares the results of this case study, along with the specific methodology
and variety of insights that can be yielded from this new, reader-informed
approach to literary criticism. My talk concludes with an open invitation for
scholars in literary studies and beyond to upload their own texts to Reader
Study to gather similar reception data for their research.

