A Capacity Building Framework for Institutional Digital Humanities Support

Quinn Dombrowski

quinnd@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley, United States of America

Joan Lippincott

joan@cni.org

Coalition for Networked Information United States of America

The development of well-known institutional digital humanities programs-- such
as those at the University of Virginia, University of Victoria, University of
Maryland, and others -- has been significantly influenced by unique
combinations of dynamic individuals and receptive institutional circumstances.
Faculty and administrators in leadership positions at a growing number
of universities are interested in developing some form of institutional support
for digital humanities research and/or pedagogical practices, but are starting
with a fragmented local landscape. Where previous work has focused on
particular facets of successful digital humanities programs (e.g.
organizational models in Maron & Pickle 2014), addressed digital
humanities within a particular organizational context (e.g. in libraries,
Varner & Hswe 2016 and Schaffner & Erway 2014) or provided case studies from a
single institution (Maron 2011), to date there has not been a holistic
framework that can serve as a guide for improving institutional support.

In spring 2016, the EDUCAUSE Center for Analysis and Research (ECAR) and the
Coalition for Networked Information (CNI) convened a working group of
fifteen library and IT professionals representing a wide range of institution
types in the US and Canada, with the goal of developing a “maturity framework”
for institutions that are either getting started on developing a
digital humanities support program/center or striving make additional progress
with their existing efforts. While the maturity framework model is commonly
used in ECAR working group publications to describe the adoption or
implementation of new technologies or methodologies, particularly in an IT
context, the working group quickly reached a unified decision that “maturity”
was the wrong model for the development of a digital humanities program.
Instead, the working group adopted a similar structure -- using defined stages
of development across multiple parameters--and termed it a “capacity building
framework”, in order to acknowledge that different institutions may prioritize
different kinds of capacity, and those choices have little bearing on the
“maturity” of the program as a whole.

The working group’s recently-published white paper identifies five major facets
of developing institutional support for digital humanities, and characterizes
for each one three stages in the development of institutional digital
humanities support: early, established and high capacity. The paper
acknowledges that different institution types, and even individual
institutions, will choose different areas to prioritize, and there is no
“one-size-fits-all” recommendation.

1. Governance -- how, and at what level(s), are decisions made? At the early
stage, there is no governance in place beyond the individual project level. As
a result, individual projects or courses flourish, or fail to do so, largely
based on individual PIs’ personal connections and ability to secure funding and
resources. For well-connected and charismatic scholars, the early stage may
seem like the ideal one, as there are no systems in place to impede them
from making any technical decision that suits them, and involving as many
support staff as they can convince to participate. While the early stage model
may be conducive to individual project capacity, given a particular kind of PI,
it does little to build capacity at the institutional level. The white paper
takes the position that governance is an important aspect of institutional
capacity-building, by providing structures for transparent decision-making
that apply equally to all projects. Depending on the institution, governance
structures may be in place to determine allocation of internal grant funding or
consulting resources, coordinate the purchase of software licenses or
expensive hardware, and/or provide input into larger decisions in program
development (e.g. whether or how to offer degree programs, whether to
participate in consortial efforts to develop infrastructure or training
programs, etc.)

2.    Infrastructure -- providing access to both technology and expertise --
sits at the core of institutional support programs for digital humanities. The
specific tools and resources provided can vary across institutions, depending
on the needs and interests of researchers and instructors, as well as
the particular skills and expertise of those providing support. The white paper
notes that the effectiveness of technical infrastructure is contingent upon the
availability of experts who can help scholars make use of that
technology. While this is especially true for resources that have a high
barrier to entry (such as high performance computing clusters), it also
applies to software (e.g. for GIS, 3D modeling, text analysis, and OCR) and
more prosaic infrastructure such as web hosting.

3.    Roles and Capabilities -- successful digital humanities work is most
often conducted in teams, with roles and capabilities from three complementary
categories: technical experts, champions of engagement, and content innovators.
Within these broad categories, there is great deal of overlap
and interdependence; and it is through the overlap of roles and interdependence
of capabilities that DH can flourish. Depending on the organizational model in
place, projects may draw upon skilled collaborators at various places within an
institution (e.g. museums and archives, central IT units) or even at
other institutions through consortial agreements.

4.    Communication and Outreach -- in the early stage of institutional support
for digital humanities, individual practitioners are not aware of one another,
and there are no established channels for disseminating news and announcements
about events, workshops, grants, and other opportunities relevant to digital
humanities. As institutional support becomes established, digital humanities
mailing lists and event calendars are created, funding is accessible for
one-off events and activities, and beginner-oriented training becomes
available. High capacity for communications and outreach involves coordinated,
regular communication, dedicated funding for activities, and multiple levels of
training covering a range of skills.

5. Acceptance -- i.e. the acceptance of digital humanities work as a component
of promotion and tenure, of course assessment, and of performance reviews for
librarians and IT staff. The white paper notes that academic acceptance of
digital humanities work is significantly influenced by developments
within particular disciplines, for example, the development of guidelines such
as those produced by the Modern Language Association (2012), American
Historical Association (2015), and College Art Association (2016)
for evaluating digital humanities scholarship. Nonetheless, an institution can
increase its capacity at the local level by having department chairs, deans and
provosts publicly take a position supporting the assessment of
digital scholarship as part of tenure dossiers and advocate for the consistent
application of disciplinary guidelines, where available. Acceptance of digital
humanities also applies to the evaluation of courses with digital humanities
components, as well as to performance evaluations for librarians and staff who
support digital humanities work. In the early stage, librarians and IT staff
provide digital humanities support “on the margins” of their jobs, whereas at a
higher-capacity stage, digital humanities support is an officially recognized
aspect of IT staff and librarians’ job descriptions, and is factored into
performance evaluations accordingly.

To complement the capacity building framework, the white paper includes a
section on getting started with developing institutional capacity. This section
has pointers for how to do an environmental scan and needs assessment, a
discussion of interdisciplinarity, recommendations for the kinds of
partnerships that support institutional capacity-building, and a number of
commonly-used organizational models.

