Information and System Design for Diversity: Can We Do Better?

Amanda Rust

a.rust@northeastern.edu

Northeastern University, United States of America

Julia Flanders

j.flanders@northeastern.edu

Northeastern University, United States of America

Digital information practitioners across many areas seek to preserve and
provide access to the voices of disenfranchised and marginalized
communities. However, the curation of cultural objects often comes with
colonial implications and power-based hierarchical differentials. Providing
access to the collections of these groups requires genuine, responsive
cooperation, and it also requires that the technical and information systems
through which we engage community contributors and participants be equally
responsive to diverse cultural circumstances and needs. With support from an
IMLS National Forums grant, the Northeastern University Digital Scholarship
Group seeks to facilitate a national conversation from which we can learn
about responsible partnership in digital projects involving such
community-driven collections. We will host a series of public and working
meetings to produce a teaching and learning toolkit, to prompt education
and change in the approach to systems design for diverse and
culturally-sensitive materials.

The need for community-driven pedagogy in this area is well recognized.
Practitioners in many fields seek genuine, responsive partnership with
the communities in which cultural artifacts were created (See, for example, the
repatriation policies of the United States’ National Museum of the
American Indian or Johnston on recent discussions of repatriation prompted by
new publications in the museum field.), deeper understanding of the hegemonic
role of knowledge representation via standardized ontological decisions (Berman
1971, Olson 2002.), and investigation into the role of algorithm, interface,
and tool design in reinforcing power differentials inherent in the status quo 
(McPherson 2012, Sweeney 2013, Chun 2011) These topics also arise in venues
such as journal special issues (see, for example: Code4Lib Special Issue
on Diversity in Library Technology, 2015; Archival Science Special Issue:
Keeping Cultures Alive: Archives and Indigenous Human Rights, 2012; Library
Quarterly Special Issue on Diversity and Library and Information Science
Education, 2013), conference presentations and keynotes (Noble 2015, Matienzo
2015, Cole 2015) such as held by the Society of American Archivists,
and current CFPs, such as those of Digital Humanities Quarterly, Archives, and 
ALISE. New interdisciplinary projects focus on building new methods and tools
for archiving media content as a corrective to past silences in the archive
(Documenting the Now, Social Media Archives Toolkit, Documenting Ferguson,
Our Marathon, to name a few). This work suggests more challenging questions:
What ethical decisions inform the dissemination of digital collections? How
are naming and representation in our information systems influenced by power?
When tools and interfaces guide interactions with documents and items, are
those interfaces responsive to community needs, or do they force a diversity of
ideas into ill-fitting boxes?

To engage with these issues and inform the toolkit we plan two forum events at
which we seek to gather a diversity of perspectives and input on the
questions above. The first forum will be held in October 2017, and our
preparation for that event will involve a detailed scan of existing LIS and
museum pedagogy in the areas central to our focus, and an examination
of existing project methodologies and processes. We will also develop a set of
design provocations, discussion questions, and a reading list. The poster will
present the results of the environmental scan, the design prompts, reading
list, and discussion questions for the opening forum, and the preliminary
design ideas for the toolkit for critique and commentary by DH2017 conference
participants. Our goal for the project is to involve diverse community input at
every stage of the design, and this poster represents the first step in
that process.

