Smart Data Approaches to Exploring Independent Datasets across
Disciplines, Media, and Perspectives for Research in the Humanities

Marcia Lei Zeng

mzeng@kent.edu

Kent State University, United States of America

James Lee

james.jlee@uc.edu

University of Cincinnati, United States of America

Research in the humanities has embraced the data-driven environment where
advanced digital technologies have created the possibility of novel and hybrid
methodologies. While the world is amazed by the many “V”s of Big Data (volume,
velocity, variety, variability, veracity), the “V”alue of such data relies
on the ability to achieve big insights from such data at any scale, great or
small (Kobielus 2016). Smart Data can be considered trusted, contextual,
relevant, cognitive, predictive, and consumable. In humanities research, Smart
Data emphasizes the organizing and integrating processes from unstructured data
to structured and semi-structured data, to make the big data smarter (Kobielus
2016, Schoch 2013).

In this panel, the interdisciplinary research teams from two universities will
share their research findings and products as well as their experiences
of using smart data approaches. As is the case with many other projects, the
teams have to face the inherent challenges of converting heritage materials
that were not machine-processable into digital datasets. Furthermore, the teams
(again, like many others) have used common applications of available
digital technologies and tools, such as GIS mapping, text encoding, fact
mining, database construction, and visualization. In addition, the projects
have employed sophisticated computer logics, the Linked Data models, network
theory, and temporal-spatial data analytics, among others. However, the unique
value of these projects lies in the exploration of independent datasets across
disciplines, media, and perspectives.

Some of such datasets were built from unstructured data and media, while some
other datasets have been existed isolated because the values are hidden in
the silos. By drawing on many types of data simultaneously and interactively in
an unprecedented manner, the research findings and established resources help
reveal the unknown-unknowns and interpret significant values.

To begin the panel, Dr. Marcia Zeng (Professor of information science) and Dr.
Hongshan Li (Professor of history) will report on the project
“Digital Humanities Research with Smart Big Data — A Network Framework of
Innovation History” using the case of the Liquid Crystal Institute (LCI) at
Kent State University (KSU), the birthplace of liquid crystal displays. Through
the work of its faculty and alumni, LCI has had a significant impact on the way
the world sees things -on our smartphones, tablets, and computer screens (Bos,
2015). By nature, innovations and inventions demand collaboration across
various kinds of networks. More and more collaborative efforts, instead of
individual hero-inventors, resulted in the innovations in the last two
centuries and, even more apparently, today. This project has focused on
a community of scientists in one large institution instead of individual
scientists. The project intended to use comprehensive data from cross
disciplines and perspectives to discover meaningful patterns in the history of
innovation. The presentation will discuss various research methodologies
applied to different types of data used by a research team consisting of more
than 10 faculty members and research assistants from the disciplines of
information science, history, geography, physics, visual communication design,
and mass communication. The presenters will share the integrated research
findings regarding the sophisticated relationships and networks of contributed
factors and impacts over LCI’s 50-year history that complement traditional
study of the history of science and technology. The presentation also aims to
share our lessons and roadmaps of taking smart data approaches with the
intention of helping more researchers to overcome the challenges in researching
the innovation history in the digital age.

The second presentation will be given by Dr. James Lee and Arlene Johnson,
co-directors of the Digital Scholarship Center at the University of Cincinnati 
(UC), along with members of their team. They will describe the team’s research
entitled “Linked Reading,” which uses sophisticated machine logics to allow
researchers to directly query, analyze, and visualize or sonify data from
multiple independent

datasets, including the University of Cincinnati’s Elliston Poetry Archive.
Since 2010, UC Libraries and the Department of English & Comparative
Literature have collaborated on The Elliston Project, an audio archive of over
700 recordings of poetry or poetry-related content. The recordings span seven
decades and include over 450 poets, including Wendell Berry, Robert Frost,
Allen Ginsberg, Louise Glück and a host of others. Alan Liu, a pioneer of
digital humanities in literary studies, considers the Elliston project to be
a “world-class poetry audio archive,” which has the potential to “alter the
dominant understandings of a ‘digital archive’ developed for textual
materials.” Linked Reading allows one to examine scholarly questions on the
question of poetry from multiple angles at once by pivoting laterally between
multiple audio and text datasets. A unique opportunity for researchers and
educators lies in constellations of micro and nano datasets that have been
inadequately studied or even ignored. This approach, gathering smaller datasets
of creative materials into a linked network, allows the team to leverage the
local strengths in the humanities and creative arts (represented in stellar
fashion by Elliston) to facilitate heretofore impossible research projects.
Consider, for instance, poetic tone. It’s a basic tenet of poetry instruction
that the poem on the page is but a score to be performed; and yet, poetry
scholarship is in virtually every instance a study of the printed poem. The
project illustrates a potential of reshaping this well-studied topic by
‘reading’ the sonic features of poetic tone in massive numbers of poetry
recordings across many linked smaller archives. As such, the aims of this
research are: 1, to transform the techniques of linked data into an analytical
and interpretive method, and 2, to adapt well-establish machine
learning techniques honed on text datasets for the analysis of large archives
of born-audio creative works.

