Real and Imagined Geography at City-Scale: Sentiment Analysis of Chicago's “One
Book” Program

Ana Lucic

alucic@depaul.edu

DePaul University, United States of America

John Shanahan

jshanah1@depaul.edu

DePaul University, United States of America

Since fall 2001, the Chicago Public Library (CPL) has chosen fiction and
nonfiction around which to organize city-wide public events, book
discussions, and other creative programming. This “One Book One Chicago” (OBOC)
program has been a successful ongoing civic initiative with great public
visibility, with participants ranging from the Mayor of Chicago to countless
book group volunteers across the city. Our “Reading Chicago Reading”
project—supported by the National Endowment for the Humanities Office
of Digital Humanities and Microsoft—works to discover how text characteristics,
library branch demographics, and promotional activities are linked variables
that can be used to predict patron response to future OBOC titles. The OBOC
program acts as a recurring experiment in data capture, for each chosen
work represents a probe into library usage and, by extension, a window onto the
elective reading behavior of the diverse patrons of a major American city.

This paper will report comparative circulation data for three recent OBOC
choices that are Chicago-centered and three that are not Chicago-centered.
The three Chicago-centered books are:

1)    The Adventures of Augie March (1953) by Saul Bellow

2)    The Warmth of the Other Suns (2011) by Isabel Wilkerson

3)    The Third Coast (2014), by Thomas Dyja

The three recent non-Chicago OBOC choices are:

1)    The Book Thief (2007) by Markus Zusak

2)    The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay (2000) by Michael Chabon

3)    Gold Boy, Emerald Girl (2010) by Yiyun Li

We are keen to answer whether a Chicago setting and, more particularly,
particular measures of linguistic sentiment about Chicago people and
places, have measurable influence on the popularity of books across Chicago.
Specifically, we are interested in examining the question of whether “Chicago”
books, fictional and nonfictional, checked out in greater numbers when they
feature characters, events, and places situated close to the readers’
own neighborhood library branch? (We use CPL library branch as a proxy for
patron home address, which we cannot know from the library system’s
anonymized checkout data.)

The results of this analysis have the potential to provide empirical answers to
long-standing questions in digital humanities research: in his Atlas of
the European Novel 1800-1900, for example, Franco Moretti speculated that
perhaps “fictional spaces are particularly suited to happy endings,” but did
not have hard numbers to judge one way or the other at the time (18 n.6). More
recently, in The Bestseller Code, Jodie Archer and Matthew Jockers argue that
“while it does matter whether an author chooses a city or the wilderness, the
specific city does not matter all that much when it comes to bestselling”
(227). Our sentiment analysis findings will contribute to open research
questions: maybe in fact the city matters when readers are in that city, and
when the places and people in that same city are written about in
particular linguistic registers. If literary form and real geography do have
detectable ties to one another, our project ought to be able to capture the
effect.

To compare the circulation pattern of non-Chicago and Chicago-related OBOC
books, we used one year of city-wide circulation data for each book, starting
with the date of the title’s public announcement as the OBOC choice. This data
was normalized by dividing the circulation raw numbers with the total number
of visitors for that year and multiplying the result by 1000. Normalizing by
the number of circulated copies was sometimes difficult because some branches
did not have any copies (but could borrow them from other branches). Given that
libraries oftentimes allocate books based on the size of the library and based
on the number of visitors, we decided to

normalize by the overall number of visitors. Distribution patterns for Chicago
and non-Chicago related sets of books are represented through the histograms
and QQ plots in Figure 1. As this analysis indicates, the circulation
distribution across 79 Chicago library branches does not follow
bell-shape distribution and is positively skewed. The Wilcoxon signed rank test
was used to test to what degree the difference in the distribution for these
two sets can be attributed to chance.


Checkouts per 1000 visitors for non-Chicago related books

[277-1]

[277-2]

1000 visitors for non-Chicago related and Chicago related books. Below, the QQ
plots for non-Chicago and Chicago related books checkouts.


Checkouts per 1000 visitors for Chicago related books

[277-3]


Results indicate that the probability that the difference in the circulation
distribution across 79 Chicago library branches for the two (paired) sets of
books can be attributed to chance is very low (p < .01).


[277-4]

Figure 2. The y-axis indicates the difference in the checkouts (1-year of
circulation data) for three Chicago related and three non-Chicago related
books.


The y-axis in Figure 2 represents the difference between the checkouts per 1000
visitors for Chicago related and non-Chicago related books. Figure 2 indicates
that the three non-Chicago related books


circulated more than the set of Chicago related books in some library branches
in the Chicago area (where the line drops into negative difference). In
some branches, however, the difference is almost minimal. The plot also
indicates that, in some branches, the OBOC Chicago-related choices had, in
fact, more checkouts than the non-Chicago OBOC choices (where the difference is
positive). Although it is difficult to establish which factors contribute to
this difference in circulation and although we cannot attribute this difference
between the two distributions to the mere fact that one set contains references
to Chicago whereas the other does not, we plan to represent the library
branches that are associated with a larger number of checkouts for Chicago
non-related books and those that are associated with a larger number of related
books on the Chicago map and analyze them against the sociodemographic and
socioeconomic characteristics of different branches (obtained from the American
Community Survey data). In the future, we plan to add more Chicago related
books to the analysis and observe how this may affect this observed pattern.

A further question of interest to us is, do the sentiment measures for these
texts map in consistent ways for different neighborhoods? To examine
these questions, we rely on Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing
capabilities (Manning et al., 2014, http://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/).
Given that the identification of places and locations is important for our
analysis, we use a tool that has consistently achieved good rankings and, in
general, boasts superior accuracy rates when compared to other named entity
recognizers (Rodriquez et al., 2012; Atdag & Labatut, 2013): the Stanford Named
Entity Recognizer, a part of the CoreNLP suite of tools. Before running the
named entity recognizer, the text is first tokenized into sentences using the
NLTK sentence tokenizer (http://www.nltk.org/). The CoreNLP program then
tokenizes sentences into words, identifies lemma for each individual word, uses
the Penn Treebank part of speech information (Toutanova & Manning, 2000), and
also notes Persons, Locations, Time Reference, and Numbers in the sentences
(Finkel et al., 2005). We are specifically interested in locations as this
category would not only identify Chicago as a location but also its streets and
landmark buildings. For sentiment analysis, we are using the Stanford sentiment
analysis tool (Socher et al., 2013)—also part of the Stanford CoreNLP—to
annotate each sentence with the sentiment score on the following scale: Very
Positive, Positive Neutral, Negative, Very Negative.

Preliminary analysis on the sentiment associated with sentences that contain
the word Chicago in the three Chicago-related books is indicated in Figure 3:

Sentiment association of the sentences that contain the word 'Chicago'

[277-5]

Figure 3 Sentiment distribution of sentences that contain the word Chicago in
Augie March, The Warmth of Other Suns, and The Third Coast

The raw count of sentences with their sentiment ratings was normalized by the
total number of sentences that contain the word Chicago. Noticeable in Figure 3
is that although these three books differ according to genre, and although they
differ in terms of topical coverage and date of publication, we see a rather
similar sentiment score pattern with respect to sentences that contain the word
Chicago. We suspect that this overall similarity pattern will start to
change as we dig deeper into the location data: we must note here that this
initial analysis above does not yet take into account local references such as
Pizzeria Uno, Pullman, the South Side, Monroe Street, and the like, but do not
also use the word Chicago in the sentence. We plan to obtain a set of place
names associated with Chicago through resources such as Open Street Maps and
GeoNames and search for all the occurrences of Chicago place names.
Additionally, we plan to use the indexes in the back of some of the books as
trusted sources of local place names.

