Humanities Data Centre (HDC) - Developing Services for Heterogenous Humanities
Research Data

Stephan Buddenbohm

stefan.buddenbohm@sub.uni-goettingen.de Göttingen State and University Library,
Germany

Claudia Engelhardt

claudia.engelhardt@sub.uni-goettingen.de Göttingen State and University
Library, Germany

Sven Bingert

sven.bingert@gwdg.de

Gesellschaft für wissenschaftliche Datenverarbeitung mbH Göttingen, Germany

Research data play a fundamental role in science and the arts and humanities, a
large part of them being either digitised or of digital provenance
nowadays. Digital research data are fragile, which means that their thorough
management and preservation is crucial to prevent the loss of data and
information, avoid redundant data collection, enable more efficient research,
ensure the verifiability and reproducibility of research results as well as the
citability and re-usability of research data.

The management and long-term preservation of digital research data requires an
infrastructure that takes into account the digital nature and heterogeneity of
the data and the diverse requirements of the research community. Research data
centres, such as the Humanities Data Centre (HDC), are key players in
this context. They provide a safe and trustworthy place for researchers to
deposit their data as well as to search for and get access to previously
deposited data. They also act as centres of expertise, offering training
and support to their community. The importance of case-specific consultation
must not be underestimated as the heterogeneity of digital research data and
the wide range of data management tasks across the data life cycle call for
extensive support by data experts.

Comprising of a large number of disciplines and employing a variety of
different research methods, the arts and humanities produce very heterogeneous
research data. A great deal of them are file-based data, such as text, audio or
video files. But there is an increasing number of more complex research data,
such as digital editions or visualisation frameworks, that consist of various
interwoven layers of different types of data. In these instances, it is often
hard or impossible to distinguish between the “primary data” and the software
application that is used to process and display the data. While there are more
or less established solutions for file-based data (e.g. repositories), the
curation and long-term preservation of complex data types still poses a
challenge to infrastructure providers.

In view of this background, the HDC developed an initial service portfolio in
its design phase that responds to the heterogeneity and complexity of arts and
humanities research data by offering consultation and training, repository
services for file-based data and the application preservation. The latter is
designed to sustain representations of complex research data such as digital
editions or visualisation frameworks.

What are the challenges for the research data centre in this? Continuous access
to static systems in a developing environment will create problems sooner or
later - the systems will eventually become outdated and inaccessible. On the
technological level, there are basically two concepts to preserve applications:
either virtualisation or emulation of components. While emulation allows the
operation of software (such as an operating system) on hardware and software
environments it had not been developed for, it costs extra computing power to
emulate the required environment, to name only one disadvantage.
Virtualisation comes with the clear benefit that the hardware appears as a
physical device to the system and to the software modules. The disadvantage is
that the virtualised environment must be sufficiently performant directly on
the hardware. But for most of the use cases considered here, only standard
hardware is being used. Hence the advantage of running more than one
virtualised system and the relatively simple management of these systems makes
the virtualisation the state of the art approach. The poster illustrates how
the application preservation of the HDC uses virtualisation to preserve complex
research data applications in a protected environment and ensure their
representation, citation and use for a finite period of time.

