Reading Ancient Scripts: Investigating the Human Visual System for
Artificial Intelligence

in Palaeography

Segolene Tarte

segolene.tarte@oerc.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Rachel Mairs

r.mairs@reading.ac.uk

University of Reading, United Kingdom

Mihaela Duta

mihaela.duta@psy.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Chrystalina Antoniades

chrystalina.antoniades@ndcn.ox.ac.uk University of Oxford, United Kingdom

With the renewed vitality of research in Artificial Intelligence, thanks in
particular to the continued development of neural network techniques
for machine learning, computer vision technologies developed for handwriting
recognition offer innovative ways of conducting research in palaeography
(Brusuelas, 2016; Hassner et al 2014; Muzurelle, 2011; Stutzmann, 2015)

In this context where artificial intelligence often endeavours to replace human
intelligence, or at least to emulate it, we are undertaking to understand
better what it is that human intelligence does when reading ancient handwritten
scripts. Ultimately, our ambition is to nudge artificial intelligence for
palaeography to be intelligent enough to identify where human intelligence is
still superior to machine intelligence (and therefore better left the upper
hand) and where researchers can benefit from algorithmic support.

Handwriting recognition is a challenging task -both for humans and machines -
because handwritten scripts inherently straddle two interlinked spheres
of intelligence: that of visual shapes, and that of semantics.

This work builds on previous research (Terras, 2006; Youtie, 1963) that has
identified six strands of human strategies in palaeography through ethnographic
analysis, the results of which were cross-referenced with the cognitive
sciences literature (Tarte, 2014). These strands were: visual perception, aural
feedback, motor feedback, semantic memory, structural knowledge acquisition,
and creativity; all continuously interacting with and feeding back into each
other to some degree. In this project, we concentrate on the task of reading
ancient handwriting - one of the many aspects of palaeographical research,
whether it is concerned with mediaeval scripts or with more ancient scripts.

In this paper, we present some findings and observations made in the process of
designing experiments to investigate some of the mechanisms underlying
handwriting recognition in a palaeographical context; preliminary results from
the experiments themselves are forthcoming.

To explore in depth how humans handle the variability of the shapes of signs in
a given script, our experiments aim to bridge between traditional ethnographic
methodologies, geared towards the gathering of qualitative data, and cognitive
sciences methodologies, geared towards the gathering of quantitative data. The
script of choice was Demotic, a script of the Late Egyptian language and whose
use spanned ten centuries, therefore displaying a large variability in shapes.
The team of scholars involved in designing and conducting our experiments was
made of: an Egyptologist/Classicist, an Ethnographer, a Neuroscientist, and a
Computer Scientist. Many of the observations reported here stem from
the epistemological encounters of very different traditions of research; they
emerged through the interdisciplinary conversations that took place in
the process of designing the experiments.

The outcome of these conversations was the following experimental setup,
building on the principles of the protocols outlined by Althaus and Plunkett
(2015) and Longcamp et al (2008). Experiment

Volunteers are invited to two experimental sessions that take place in a
library setting, where they interact with a tablet computer using a stylus. The
first session is a learning session and the second is a delayed recognition
session. The sessions take place at least one week apart.

During the learning session volunteers learn to recognise 5 Demotic signs
(target signs). This session comprises of a familiarisation phase followed by
an immediate recognition phase. The familiarisation phase can comprise of one
of the following three familiarisation conditions:

•    static passive familiarisation - 3-second repeated presentation of each
sign

•    static active familiarisation - repeated presentation of each sign with
time for the volunteer to draw the sign on the tablet using the stylus

•    dynamic familiarisation - 3-second repeated presentation of movies
depicting the drawing of each sign

During the familiarisation phase each sign is presented 8 times, twice in each
of 4 distinct hands. The presentation order is pseudo-randomize to ensure that
signs don’t appear twice in a row. Each volunteer is assigned randomly to one
of the three familiarisation conditions. The familiarisation phase is followed
by a 2-step immediate recognition phase. In the first recognition phase, pairs
of Demotic signs are presented; each pair is made of one target sign and
one distractor sign (the distractors are also Demotic signs), and in the second
recognition phase words containing the target sign are presented.

The delayed recognition session comprises of three phases:    a delayed
recognition, a repeated

familiarisation and a re-enforced delayed recognition. The two delayed
recognition phases are similar to the immediate recognition phase, while the
repeated familiarisation is similar to the familiarisation of the learning
session.

At the first session, all volunteers are given a short video introduction that
aims to prime them towards scripts and writing before starting the experiment;
the second session ends with a debrief where volunteers are given the freedom
to ask questions about the tasks or scripts to the experimenter.

Negotiations

In the process of designing this experimental setup, a number of fascinating
questions emerged due to the intrinsic multidisciplinary nature of the project.
The main interdisciplinary negotiations that took place can be summarised
thematically as revolving around: the definition of an alphabet; the nature of
script and materiality; and biases and mixed methodologies.

Alphabet

As the researchers and the volunteers evolve in an environment where the
default script is alphabetic, we decided to choose an alphabetic script. The
choice of Demotic can therefore be questioned: Demotic is not an alphabetic
script, even if most of its signs have a phonetic value. We wanted however to
use real data -as opposed to an invented alphabet - so was there any context in
which Demotic might have been used as an alphabet? From the Ptolemaic period
onwards, the frequency of Greek names in Egypt is higher, and therefore
documents bearing Greek names resort to transliterating them into Demotic.
Although there was no received orthography for those transliterations,
it becomes more acceptable, in this specific context, to consider Demotic signs
as alphabetic signs (for the purpose of this experiment, determinatives,
when present, were regarded as not part of the word).

In turn, this deliberate choice also made a search for images of signs written
in different hands easier. By querying http://www.trismegistos.org/ (Brouz and
Depauw, 2015) for a list of Greek personal names in Demotic documents, and
cross-referencing the results of this search with those from a query
on papyri.info for all papyri in Demotic that have accompanying digital images,
it was possible to identify and isolate images of Greek personal names written
in Demotic on papyri.

Nature of script and materiality

The question of the homogeneity of the signals presented to the volunteers is
important in the cognitive sciences. However, isolating the signs from their
support means possibly removing information (e.g. faint ink on more salient
fibres of a papyrus, degraded or stained papyri). So in an effort to
present realistic data, we have decided to use greyscale images, to crop the
images of words/signs and to simply uniformize the overall look of the images
of words by aligning their histograms; we have also endeavoured to present all
signs in such a way that they have a similar size (so some scaling
was performed).

A further question was that of the phonetic dimension of the script. From a
cognitive sciences perspective, as the focus is on the visual, it didn’t
make sense to add a phonetic element to the script at this stage. Only when it
is better understood how the visual processes handle variability in shape, can
it be envisaged to add a multisensory layer of complexity.

This raises some intriguing questions with regard to the nature of a script. In
particular, isn’t the essence of an alphabetic script to be a notation system
for phonetic word utterances? What does the removal of its phonetic dimension
entail for the script (regardless of whether the existing phonetic dimension is
a modern convention or an actuality)? Are we denaturing the script by
presenting its signs stripped of their phonetic values?

Biases and mixed methods

Negotiating between the highly-controlled design of experiments in the
cognitive sciences and the naturalistic settings and exchanges of
ethnography proved complex. The main concern in such endeavours is to not
compromise the validity of the gathered data with respect to the frameworks of
the traditional disciplines. Free exchanges between volunteer and experimenter
have the potential to bias the overall results for the cognitive sciences, as
the bias is uncontrolled; it was therefore important for any such exchanges to
happen only after all data of the controlled variables are collected.

Even then, leaving space for free exchange within the confines of the
experiment worried the cognitive scientists who feared to open the door to
highly irrelevant questions or even somewhat leftfield questions (e.g. “Can you
see my gift of clairvoyance?”) It appeared that such questions might be
favoured by the running of such experiments in medicalised environments
(hospital, psychology department), so we ran our experiments at the library
instead, thereby establishing an environment resonant with our overarching
theme of reading.

The process of designing these experiments as well as the forthcoming results
have some bearing on the understanding of expertise of course, but also on
how one might proceed when faced with a large corpus of unedited textual
artefacts: Can crowdsourcing approaches be specifically geared towards
the strength of the human visual system? Can algorithmic approaches palliate
the weaknesses of the human visual system?

Acknowledgments

This project is funded by the John Fell Oxford University Press (OUP) Research
Fund.

In L. Aiello and D. McFarland (eds), Social Informatics. SocInfo 2014
International Workshops, GMC and Histin-formatics, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 8852, Springer, pp 304-13.

Brusuelas, J. (2016). “Engaging Greek: Ancient lives”. In G. Bodard and M.
Romanello, (eds), Digital Classics Outside the Echo-Chamber: Teaching,
Knowledge Exchange & Public Engagement, Ubiquity Press, London, pp 187204. .

Hassner, T., Sablatnig, R., Stutzmann, D., and Tarte, S.

(2014). Digital Palaeography: New Machines and Old Texts (Dagstuhl Seminar
14302). Dagstuhl Reports, 4(7):112-34.

Longcamp, M., Boucard, C., Gilhodes, J.-C., Anton, J.-L.,

Roth, M., Nazarian, B., and Velay, J.-L. (2008). “Learning through hand- or
typewriting influences visual recognition of new graphic shapes: Behavioral and

functional imaging evidence.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(5):802-815.

Muzerelle, D. (2011). “À la recherche d'algorithmes experts en écritures
médiévales.” Gazette du livre médiéval, 56-57:5-20.

Stutzmann, D. (2015). “Clustering of medieval scripts

through computer image analysis: Towards an evaluation protocol.” Digital
Medievalist, 10.

Terras, M. (2006) Image to Interpretation. An Intelligent System to Aid
Historians in Reading the Vindolanda

Texts. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Tarte, S. (2014). “Interpreting textual artefacts: Cognitive insights into
expert practices.” In C. Mills, M. Pidd, and

E. Ward, (eds), Proceedings of the Digital Humanities

Congress 2012, Studies in the Digital Humanities. Sheffield: HRI Online
Publications.

Youtie, H. C. (1963). “The papyrologist: artificer of fact.” Greek, Roman and
Byzantine Studies, 4(1):19-33.

