Humanities At Scale -Creating A Network Of Expertise And A
Sustainable Infrastructure For Digital Humanities Projects In Europe

Markus Matoni

matoni@sub.uni-goettingen.de

State and University Library Gottingen, Germany

Jenny Oltersdorf

oltersdorf.jen@gmail.com

FH Potsdam, Germany

Dirk Roorda

dirk.roorda@dans.knaw.nl

Data Archiving and Networked Services, Netherlands

Digital Humanities (DH), as a growing field, generates lots of innovative new
tools and methods to enhance work in humanities disciplines. To ensure a
sustainable digital European infrastructure for long-term

availability of digital research data and tools the

DARIAH infrastructure (Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and
Humanities) aims at the development of a strong cooperation and information
exchange between research communities and institutions in the arts and
humanities. The ambition to extend this community and create a European-wide
network of expertise was one of the reasons to initiate the new Horizon 2020
project Humanities at Scale (HaS).

The project coordinated by DARIAH-EU aims to evolve the DARIAH community, offer
training and information material, set up a number of training workshops and
develop core services within a sustainable framework. Within this framework a
research infrastructure to connect DH research tools, services and data will be
established and the challenge is to build technical systems to support this.

The poster will highlight and answer the following questions from a technical
perspective:

•    How can a decentralized framework (architecture of participation) of tools
and services be developed and maintained?

•    Which kind of technologies are useful to establish a sustainable framework
for DH-tools and -services?

•    What is needed to integrate externally developed tools into such a
framework?

The DH community, as a network of expertise, created and still creates a lot of
important tools and services - often only in a specific project context or for
one particular research question. To make these tools and services accessible,
re-usable, and open for DH, HaS is building a sustainable technical framework
which will advance the creation and enhancement of digital tools. This will
improve applications, enlarge possibilities for publication and enable
long-term preservation of research data and digital methods. Just hosting
digital tools is not sufficient. Code and server configuration require constant
maintenance and ongoing development - an elementary issue for a decentralized
and unified infrastructure. Thus, within the HaS project, researchers and
developers get conceptual and technical support for their tools and services to
enable a better integration into the community.

Furthermore, projects in the Digital Humanities need key central services. They
often must spend a large proportion of their available resources on
basic infrastructure components. To investigate demands regarding service
requirements and tools a survey was conducted in summer 2016. Its aim was to
get an overview of the currently used services and tools and the ones, which
will become relevant in the future. The survey design enabled a gap analysis
focusing on the following three kinds of tools and services:

•    Development services such as Git/SVN, Chili or Open Project. They support
developers in code hosting, code review, the development of workflows and
documentation. They improve the organization and quality of code and the
workflows for writing it.

•    Hosting services comprise virtual machines, storage and repository
solutions, configuration management tools and monitoring environments. They
provide basics for a sustainable development and ongoing operation of DH
services.

•    Collaboration tools support the whole area of DH. Collaborative writing
and managing of

digital content in a content management system are major ingredients of
everyday's work.

To connect all services and tools HaS will define requirements to enhance the
integration.

Besides these enabling, generic tools, the DARIAH community is also producing
highly specific research tools that we need to take into account. That will
be organized as a bottom-up process, drawing information from existing tools
that have been contributed to DARIAH or tools which are offered as candidate
contributions. In order to harvest their characteristics, HaS is building a
contribution registry, called the DARIAH Inkind Tool. It should not only
collect technical specifications, but also generate an overview of what is
available in terms of research capabilities. And last but not least, the
registry will be used to assess the

cost and value of the DARIAH contributions. The existence of the Inkind 
registry will enable the DH community to muster a lot of information about each
tool, such as documentation, use-cases, application descriptions, data
examples, research scenarios and particular training possibilities.

The general aim of the poster is to present the results of the project to the
community to get important feedback. This includes the chance to present the
participants of the poster-sessions a live-demo (German and English) of the
contribution registry. All in all, the presentation will provide insights on
how we face sustainability from a technological view.

