Perseids and Plokamos: Weaving pedagogy, data models and tools for
social network annotation

Marie-Claire Beaulieu

marie-claire.beaulieu@tufts.edu Tufts University, United States of America

Frederik Baumgardt

frederik.baumgardt@tufts.edu

Tufts University, United States of America

Bridget Almas

bridget.almas@tufts.edu

Tufts University, United States of America

The Perseids Project is developing a platform on which students and scholars
engage in collaborative acts of scholarship and research on ancient texts 
(Almas & Beaulieu, 2016). A core value of the project is the focus on pedagogy
and the development of undergraduates as researchers. This is complemented by
an emphasis on reuse and sharing of tools, data and resources. We keep these
values in mind as we develop infrastructure to support complex workflows for
the production of new forms of digital publications that are both
machine-actionable and human-understandable. In this paper we describe one
specific research activity undergraduate students have been conducting on
Perseids, the annotation of the social networks of mythological characters. We
discuss how opportunities and challenges, both pedagogical and technical, have
presented themselves throughout multiple iterations of this effort, and how we
evolved the architecture, information structures, and pedagogical workflows in
response. We will use our findings to guide future decisions on when to build
or reuse tools, and to formulate empirically founded recipes and approaches for
specific user scenarios and data types.

The social network annotation project was motivated by an interest in teaching
how to produce interpretations of mythological figures and texts. As explained
by Schacht, annotation is an activity that is well known to produce deep
engagement with a text in the form of close reading while
promoting collaboration and conversation among students (Schacht 2016). In this
case, we needed to produce interpretations that would be anchored in the
primary materials and allow for a representation at the conceptual level. We
decided to annotate Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography
and Mythology (Smith’s), which offers both a complete narrative for each figure
and references to the primary sources on which the narrative is based. This
allowed for a double learning outcome. For instance, students would observe
that Scylla is directly connected only to first and second generation Titans
who represent monstrous or rebellious aspects of nature such as Typhon
(volcanoes) and Charybdis (whirlpools). In addition, by following and
researching the references to the primary sources, students would note
that ancient texts characterize Scylla with words such as “rabid”,
“aggressive”, and “deadly”. In this way, students learned that mythological
genealogies and social connections are the links which the Greeks made between
different concepts represented by the mythological figures. By studying the
words with which ancient texts characterize mythological figures, the students
understood the value (positive or negative) associated with these concepts in
Greek culture.

As we always look to reuse rather than build from scratch when possible, we
developed an annotation workflow for this activity using Hypothes.is,
an existing open source annotation tool (on the use of Hypothes.is in the
classroom, see Kennedy 2016) . We also selected the Standards for Networking
Ancient Prosopographies (SNAP) ontology for representation of the social
network in the annotations, and the Open Annotation (OA) data model for
serialization of the data (Sanderson et al. 2013a) Hypothes.is lacked support
for controlled vocabularies, but offered freeform text entry as well as tags,
worked on any website, and provided an API for retrieval of the annotations. We
prepared explicit tagging instructions for the students with rules that would
enable us to apply the controlled terms and data model to the
annotations. Students submitted lists of their annotation URIs to the Perseids
platform for ingest, review and publication of the data. Perseids software
retrieved the students’ data from the Hypothes.is API, and upon ingest, applied
a transformation, producing OA-compliant annotations using the SNAP ontology.
Once the annotations were approved by reviewers in Perseids, we exported the
data for final publication via the GapVis interface, to which we added a
social network visualization and support for Canonical Text Services data
sources.

We completed two full annotation rounds with separate student groups using this
workflow. A key finding from a review of the data from the first round was that
the lack of ability to visualize the networks at the time of annotation left
too much room for error in the directionality of the annotations (On the
efficacy of visualization in computer-assisted learning, see Baek and Lane
1988). Despite having explicit instructions on how to identify the subject and
object of the annotations, it was difficult for both the students and the
reviewers to appreciate their importance without being able to see how their
choices impacted the final data. We ended up, for example, with
annotations which identified a mother as the son of her child. We tried to
address this in the second round by providing even more precise instructions,
but the same mistakes were made. Our instructions and transformation rules also
became more complex because, having identified the pedagogical significance of
the characterizations, we asked students to annotate them as well as the social
network connections. Through this process it became clear that we were trying
to use the Hypothes.is tool in a way which was very different from the use
cases it was developed to support. As a result, we had a workflow which
required too much focus on following complex written instructions.
This detracted from the pedagogical effectiveness of the activity as well as
the overall quality of the resulting annotation data.

[330-1]

Figure 1. Plokamos network visualization based on students' annotations

At the end of this experimentation phase, we undertook a process of surgical
development to address these concerns. With a much clearer understanding of our
requirements, and the importance of immediate, visual feedback to
the annotation and review process, we developed a targeted interface for
semantic annotation which would work on any source text and allow for the
data network to be visualized during the annotation process (see Fig. 1). The
tool we developed - Plokamos, which is Greek for "something woven" - is a
Javascript application backed by an RDF-based triple store. The Plokamos
interface is also designed for reuse in other workflows and by other teams. It
can be embedded into an existing application and can be extended to support
other ontologies and rdf-based annotation bodies. At all times, the data itself
remains separate from the tool and available for export and reuse.
The configuration is also externalized from the code, and managed, along with
the data, as RDF graphs. In our current deployment of Plokamos we reuse
Perseids’ user model, the Nemo Citable Text Services text browsing interface,
and the Apache Marmotta triple store, and we continue use of the OA data model
and the SNAP ontology.

We can also see the evolution and objectives of the project reflected in the
underlying data structures of the annotations themselves. The annotations
consist of a frame with metadata pertaining to their type, provenance and the
targeted data source; linked from the frame is the annotation body containing
the actual semantics of the annotation. We examine these structures at two
architectural levels and from two usage perspectives.

[330-2]

Figure 2. Graph- and Resource-based anchoring of annotation bodies

In designing the body we considered different topologies (of the connection
between body and frame; and of the body itself -- structural multiplicity, see
Sanderson et al, 2013b) and the compromises they represent between clarity of
the annotation body and ease of traversal between annotation frame and body. An
annotation body can be embedded into a distinct and uniquely named graph which
is referenced by the annotation frame (see Fig. 2 (a)); or it can be
anchored through one or more identifying resources which are referenced as the
annotation body (see Fig. 2 (b)). The former approach enables quick and easy
delineation of individual annotations and allows for complex topologies with
multiple graph components. The latter approach offers less flexibility in the
structure and complexity of the individual annotations but linking the payload
with intermediate resources provides easier pathways to their reuse in other
graphs, queries and analyses.

[330-3]

Figure 3. Transformation between machine-actionable and human-readable
topologies

The need for the resulting annotation bodies to be understandable by humans as
well as algorithmic processing is another factor impacting the data model. Both
user groups have different requirements for the topology of the annotation
data. Humans may prefer a more direct representation of the data in which
objectrelational structures are left implicit, while algorithms are not only
indifferent to indirect construction but benefit from a more explicit and
formal description of the underlying data.

[330-4]

Figure 4. Annotation interface for entry of social network data

We have used the design of the Plokamos’ user interface to help us mediate
between these different perspectives. The interface guides the users
through the annotation process with a simplified representation of entities and
relations in the form of unadorned subject-predicate-object triples (Fig.
4), offering pre-configured choices to to help ensure data integrity, and we
use a graph-based system of configuration to transform and expand to the
more complex structures in the final annotation data.

Through this iterative approach to supporting the social network annotation
activity, putting our core values of pedagogy and reuse front-and-center,
we have been able to explore the pedagogical effectiveness of annotation as a
learning method with a fairly low initial investment of resources. This allowed
us to validate the importance of supporting this activity and refine our
understanding of the architecture and data models that would be best suited to
it. We were then able to approach the development of custom tools more
efficiently, while still designing for maximum extensibility and reuse. The
resulting web interface with its RDF-based data source and configuration can be
used on a wide variety of existing classroom resources, and expanded upon to
support new use cases with varying annotation body, target types, and visual
representations.

