Interpreting Racial Identities and Resistance to Segregation in the
Digital Sphere

Mishio Yamanaka

yamanaka@live.unc.edu

UNC Chapel Hill, United States of America

This poster demonstrates my digital history project, “The Fillmore Boys School
in 1877: Racial Integration, Creoles of Color and the End of Reconstruction in
New Orleans,” (http://fillmoreschool.web.unc.edu) which visualizes how, in
1877, Creoles of color, a group of francophone Catholics of interracial
descent, responded to the city school board’s racial segregation plan. Through
geo-spatial analysis and virtual representation of information of the Fillmore
School student register, the project examines Creole families’ resistance to
segregation and facilitates public understanding of ambiguous racial identities
that become often invisible in the black and white racial dichotomy of United
States history.

The Fillmore School served as a catalyst for Creoles’ ideal of racial equality
and the center of their resistance to segregation. During
Reconstruction, Creoles of color led the legal, political and
grassroots campaign that ultimately resulted in the desegregation of
approximately one-third of the public schools in New Orleans between 1871
and 1877. Fillmore was one of the integrated schools that many Creoles of color
attended until the school board designated it as white-only in 1877. Its 1877
register contains 658 students’ individual information, including name,
residential address, age, admission date, and parents’ name and their
occupation. While the register does not list race, it includes notations
of transfer to a “colored” school for 16 students. In addition, my digital
research and mapping revealed that at least forty Creole students requested
admission to the school as a sign of protest. This project thus demonstrates a
complex process of segregation, resistance and racial identities among Creoles
of color in New Orleans.

The project has undergone four processes: 1) transcription, 2) data collection,
3) mapping, and 4) website building. First, I digitized the entire
1877 Fillmore School student data. Second, I searched the 1870 and 1880
censuses and city directory information of the students by using
ancestry.com. Next, I deployed ArcGIS and geo-referenced the 1883 Robinson
Atlas, the most comprehensive map of New Orleans for the era, and collected
students’ latitude-longitude information. I used ArcGIS because it allowed me
to publish the data as an interactive map while simultaneously conducting
geo-spatial analysis. The project processed 566 student data entries to
be published as an interactive map to the public. Finally, I built a website to
contextualize the map.

The main part of my poster demonstrates the ArcGIS map. It pays particular
attention to the ways in which the map shows students’ residences with
their variable racial information taken from the register, the 1870 and 1880
censuses and city directories. The map displays the complex reality of
segregation in New Orleans. The censuses classified many Creole students as
mulatto or white. However, the census racial information does not always
correlate with that of the school register. The poster also focuses on how
the map represents multimedia information about Creoles of color and shows
their admission attempts as a tactic to resist racial resegregation. I will
also discuss challenges I faced in mapping, including the lack of complete
data.

The poster also introduces my project website that offers a virtual space for
users to consider responses among ordinary Creoles of color
confronting segregation and understand the complicated history of race and
ethnicities in the United States. The website currently offers Creole family
narratives to further contextualize the map. It also provides a short history
of the Fillmore School and school racial policies in New Orleans.

Last, this poster discusses the future plan for the project. First, I will
deploy social network analysis of the Creole parents and children at Fillmore
and examine how their close social relationships contributed to resistance.
Second, I plan to examine the Fillmore School history in the twentieth century
by using oral interviews to reflect another desegregation attempt during the
civil rights movement in the 1960s. Overall, this poster argues for digital
ways to illuminate ambiguous identities and a wide range of struggles against
racism in the late nineteenth century United States and discusses how digital
humanities enrich historical research.

