A Pale Reflection of the Violent Truth? Practice and Pedagogy with a
Digital Geography of American Lynching

Seth Kotch

sethk@unc.edu

UNC Chapel Hill, United States of America

Elijah Gaddis

ejgaddis@live.unc.edu

UNC Chapel Hill, United States of America

We propose a discussion of the pedagogical process and representational
implications of our digital project, The Red Record. The Red Record is an
open-ended, ongoing project created using DH Press that situates historic
American lynchings, starting with those that took place in North Carolina, on a
Cartesian map. In its current state the project offers primary source
documentation and scholar-produced context for each of the 112 lynching events,
which took the lives of 147 people in the state between 1865 and 1941. The
initial project was undertaken by a seminar of first year students at the
University of North Carolina, and subsequently amended with the research of two
additional undergraduate classes. In the session proposed here, we detail the
process of research and the intertwined workflow that simultaneously teaches
students primary research skills and forces them to confront the legacies of
racial violence inherent in the landscapes they live in. We suggest that the
pedagogical model of this project has broader implications for the ways that
digital representations might seek to engage diverse populations in
understanding and contributing to the knowledge of the places they are from. In
the papers here, we consider both the implications of digital representations
of lynching, and the possibilities and practical obstacles in extending this
project through student and community crowdsourcing.

Until recently, North Carolina has enjoyed a reputation as a less objectionable
southern state, whether as a “vale of humility” between the less commendable
Virginia and South Carolina, or as a “business progressive” southern state,
concerned enough about outside investment to control its citizens’ worst
impulses. The problem of lynching, widely studied in states such as Georgia and
Virginia, has received less attention from North Carolina’s scholars: the only
monograph on the subject is a summary-study our research found to contain
a number of errors. Visual scholarship on the subject is limited. In 2000, 
Without Sanctuary, a gruesome collection of lynching postcards, opened in New
York and was soon followed by a website which still exists but which shows its
age. Without Sanctuary was and is an important project, one that shocked
viewers as to the extent of historical violence. Yet today, as we regularly
witness violence against persons of color on social media or television news,
we must wonder about troubling side effects of Without Sanctuary: that in
presenting lynchings as sepia-toned horrors of the past, it appeared to
relegate such violence to history and allow for a self-satisfied reassurance
that this time had passed.

Such is the challenge for any project addressing historical trauma. Adding to
this concern are questions of representation. In uncritically presenting images
of lynchings, Without Sanctuary risked reproducing the work of those postcards,
which traveled the country presenting damaged black bodies that titillated as
much as it horrified, and even in their extremity regularized and commodified
anti-Black violence. We know that lynchings themselves echoed across
generations in Black communities (Wolf, 1992) did Without Sanctuary address
that trauma or amplify it? Do the victims of lynchings have, in a sense,
the right to be forgotten? (Causey, 2015) In pursuing Locating Lynching, we
remained aware of these risks and encountered still more: how to choose
visual anchors for our display, whether or not to publish images of trauma, how
to share accounts of lynchings from the white and Black presses without
false equivalence, what kinds of information to include about persons who do
not deserve to be remembered only as victims. Our panel will address these
issues in detail, share our solutions, and explain our next steps as we
continue to work.

A key element of our project and our panel is pedagogy, both in terms of
engaging undergraduate students with digital, primary-source research and
in terms of engaging them with a traumatic subject. It is the rare
undergraduate student, particularly in a seminar designed for first-year
students, who is well-

equipped to conduct original research. But with the recent digitization of
hundreds of thousands of pages of small-town newspapers, of censuses from the
19th and early 20th centuries, and of city directories and historic maps, the
hidden histories of lynchings, their victims, and their perpetrators have never
been more visible. As historians, we can and have learned stories from the
darkened margins: We have learned the story a young man who escaped a lynching
attempt and fled the state, ending up, married and with a son, as a doorman in
the United Nations building in Manhattan. We have learned the names of the
white men who kidnapped from jail an African American man jailed on a rape
accusation and hanged him. We know these people’s addresses, their occupations,
the names of their parents and children. In both these marginal stories, and in
the aggregating potential of digital visualizations, we can tell some small
part of the abbreviated life stories of these people, albeit in the context of
their deaths. Teaching undergraduate students the process whereby they can make
these discoveries - as detailed in our nine-page research guide - can be
transformative. We ask our students, who are awash in digital representation
and misrepresentation, to carefully consider their choices in saving,
commenting on, and presenting past identities.

