Hack, Yack, Stack: Access, Culture, and DH Infrastructure

Laura Braunstein

lrb@dartmouth.edu

Dartmouth College, United States of America

Thomas Padilla

thomaspadilla@ucsb.edu

UC Santa Barbara, United States of America

Amanda Visconti

amandavisconti@gmail.com

Scholar’s Lab, University of Virginia Library, United States of America

Abstract

In an essay exploring the possibilities of “critical infrastructure studies,”
Alan Liu calls upon scholars to “'see through' the supposed rationality
of organizations and their supporting infrastructures to the fact that they are
indeed social institutions with all the irrationality that implies." This panel
brings together three librarians from different institutional contexts to
interrogate DH infrastructure as a primarily social -- and irrational --
formation. If DH infrastructure is "only" what we make of it, how do
we consciously, actively shape DH infrastructure to support what DH could be?
How do the social formations of DH infrastructure activate -- but
also potentially inhibit -- access by scholars, students, and publics? How do
certain social formations of institutional DH mask the emotional labor of
DH professionals supporting the work of other researchers? And finally, what is
the relationship between infrastructure and underlying institutional culture?
Can a critically engaged infrastructure overcome or repair a culture that may
undermine the values that we want to instill?

Laura Braunstein will explore the challenges of sustaining DH infrastructure
without a DH center. Project management, collaboration, outreach, and digital
pedagogy take an ad-hoc and at times, rogue presence, connected only by virtual
infrastructure. A DH community of practice that exists primarily as a social
network can enable serendipitous connections, but it is not sustainable, for
scholars, teams, or projects. How can we institutionalize a virtual DH
noncenter in order to support activities and projects without inhibiting its
energy and possibility?

Thomas Padilla will explore assumptions latent in prevailing notions of
scalability in the Digital Humanities. The need to qualify DH
infrastructure development, web-based projects, and data sources by the extent
to which they are scalable or not tends have the effect of either totally
disincentivizing participation by cultural heritage organizations
or incentivizing in a manner that tends to occlude acts of individual agency
and creation. How can we work to develop practices and methods for exposing
and according value to a wide range of cultural heritage work? In what ways
does exposing agency and according value to intellectual and physical labor
a necessary predicate of research integrity in DH?

Amanda Visconti will explore how we might align DH resource investment with
explicit personal and intellectual values such as inclusion and open
access. Multiple DH centers already define the scope of the DH they support not
through some over-generalization (e.g. “we support innovation in humanities via
digital scholarship”), but instead through charters envisioning and encouraging
a DH that performs what we care about. How do we use the wiggle room at
our disposal, small or large, to push our institutions toward supporting a
better DH? How can we act on our values through policies that center resources
on work strengthening these values?

Panel organization

As the discussion is informed by each speaker's local context, each of the
three speakers will give a 5-minute introduction of their background and
interests (15 minutes total). Each speaker will then interview the other two
speakers with a prepared question (2 questions from each speaker, 6 questions
total at 5 minutes each, 30 minutes total). At the last part of the panel,
we'll open up the discussion for both Q&A and audience sharing; the panelists
will moderate the conversation so that everyone gets a chance to contribute.

The speakers are:

Laura Braunstein, Digital Humanities Librarian, Dartmouth College Thomas
Padilla, Humanities Data Curator, University of California Santa Barbara Amanda
Visconti, Managing Director, Scholars’ Lab, University of Virginia Library

http://literaturegeek.com/2016/09/11/designing-

digital-humanities-initiative-background-campus-

survey

