University-Community Digitization Partnerships: Accessing Trans Collections in
LGBT Community Archives

Elspeth Brown

elspeth.brown@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

Cait McKinney

cait.mckinney@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

This paper explores university and community partnerships to preserve and
provide online access to LGBTQ cultural heritage materials, focusing
in particular on projects that improve the accessibility and profile of
transgender materials in traditional gay and lesbian organizations. The paper
reflects on the promises and challenges of pursuing trans-positive, activist
digital humanities projects within the context of a historically cis gay and
lesbian analogue archive. How have anxieties surrounding
digital transformations in the archive become enmeshed in concerns about
changing understandings of sexual and gender embodiment within the
LGBTQ community? How has the queer archive’s shift to the digital engendered
not only “privacy anxieties” (Chenier 2015) but also identity anxieties, as a
new generation of non-binary and trans volunteers, scholars, and activists
reshape the meanings of “LGBTQ” within the community archive?

The paper reports on the first three years of the LGBTQ Oral History Digital
Collaboratory (http://lgbtqdigitalcollaboratory.org/), a five-year SSHRC-funded
project directed by Elspeth Brown at the University of Toronto. The
Collaboratory works in partnership with the Canadian Lesbian and Gay Archives (
http://clga.ca/), a volunteer-run, community archives, to design and implement
inhouse digitization programs. This project has invested significant labour and
technology into the acquisition and digitization of transgender materials
underrepresented in the CLGA’s collection, and in historically “Gay and
Lesbian” community archives more broadly (Rawson 2009; Morris and
Rawson, 2013).

This paper will outline the technical and political concerns behind two
Collaboratory/CLGA partnership projects aimed at improving access to trans
materials: 1) The development of an audio digitization station for oral history
cassette tapes; and 2) the processing and digitization of transsexual artist
and activist Mirha-Soleil Ross’ personal papers. We argue that the planning and
implementation of digitization initiatives is a significant catalyst for
broader, mandate-driven shifts within LGBTQ cultural heritage organizations. We
argue that this is particularly the case when these partnerships drawn on
humanities-based approaches that understand the archive as a worlding
technology (Stoler 2010, Eichhorn 2013) caught up within broader conflicts that
challenge and divide LGBT spaces. More specifically, the paper outlines
how university partners can support the development of digital infrastructures
in community-based, volunteer-engaged contexts. We suggest that this labour can
be understood as part of a broader politics of digitization that must be
approached with care when forming community partnerships. We understand
digitization as a wide-ranging process that transcends the conversion of
“analog” materials into digital formats: digitization has the potential to
shift economies of attention in social movement organizations undergoing
transition (McKinney 2015).

Theoretically, the paper engages with queer, trans, and feminist approaches to
digital archives (Chenier 2009; McLeod et al, 2014; Matte 2015). In
particular, we draw on scholarship that has considered how trans materials have
the potential to confound, challenge, and ultimately re-formulate archival
systems (Brown 2015; Roberto 2011). Here, digital spaces and technologies
provide historical “worldmaking” opportunities often denied to trans histories
within “LGBT” spaces (Rawson 2014). Emphasizing the relationship between
“trans” and movement (Stryker, Currah, Moore 2008), we consider the moments
where digitization meets trans as potentially productive but also acrimonious
challenges for LGBT archives primarily concerned, in practice, with
GayandLesbian (Noble 2006) cultural memory.

The paper covers two case studies from the Collaboratory/CLGA project, and will
explain the technical questions and organizational concerns behind the design
and roll-out of both projects in order to support the argument outlined above.

Audio Digitization Station

Begun in year one (2014), this station sought to develop a technologically
accessible digitization solution for audio-cassette tapes, most of
which contain oral histories produced in the 1980s and 90s. We will outline the
accessibility concerns at the heart of this project, including how the audio
digitization protocol the project established sought to build organizational
comfort with digitization practices by integrating the system with existing
database infrastructures and ways of organizing volunteer labour at the
archives. This part of the paper will also address how the Collaboratory
identified trans audio collections within the archives, and will touch on
some of the challenges in locating these materials. This material will be
useful for humanities scholars in sexuality and gender studies who are
concerned about creating digital preservation plans for audio-based primary
source materials they might collect or create. Mirha-Soleil Ross Papers

Begun in year three (2016), this project is working to process, digitize, and
improve access to the personal papers of Mirha-Soleil Ross, one of the most
significant figures in transgender activism and cultural production in Canada.
Donated to the archives in 2008, this large collection had not yet been
processed by archives volunteers and as result, was mostly inaccessible to
researchers. We are working in collaboration with Ms. Ross, and several members
of the trans community, to organize these materials, determine access
restrictions for sensitive content, create an online finding aid, and an online
digital collection using the Omeka platform, which will sample from the larger
volume of material. This part of the paper asks how digitization might provide
an opportunity to repair damaged relationships between LGBT organizations and
trans communities. It also considers some of the unique privacy
concerns scholars must consider when providing online access to materials that
document trans lives.

