A Handbook of Electronic Literature Reading

Elika Ortega

e.ortegaguzman@northeastern.edu Northeastern University, United States of
America

Erik Radio

radio@email.arizona.edu

University of Arizona, United States of America

The changes effected by digital platforms on reading continue to be a contested
area in popular culture, pedagogy, and higher education. This is also an area
where electronic literature (e-lit), digital humanities scholarship, and
information science can shed much light. Works of e-lit are a rich
testing ground to explore how creative, non-commercial uses of digital media
have been exploited and proposed to readers. In our Handbook of Electronic
Literature Reading, we explore the reading instructions accompanying e-lit
works to investigate the performative engagement of reading from
the perspective of storage medium, objects and modes of interaction, and
gestures or actions. The data included in the reading instructions shed light
on how reading practices have morphed depending on platform historically over
the last three decades. This focus has warranted an examination into current
bibliographic practices to determine how the new modalities of e-lit require
different descriptive methods and approaches to metadata creation.

Background

To say that digital reading platforms (web, ereaders, smartphones, etc.) are
changing the way reading has been practiced in the age of print is now
a truism. Often, these shifts have been the object of elegiac meditations
(Birkerts, Manguel) and pedagogical concerns (NEA's “Reading at Risk” and
“To Read or Not to Read”). These approaches highlight the ‘erosion’ that the
practice of reading is undergoing. A useful corrective has been Andrew Piper’s
Book Was There. His call to think about reading from the basis of “the
relationship between reading and hands, [and] the long history of how touch has
shaped reading and, by extension, our sense of ourselves while we read” (3) has
brought to light the bodily handling of reading objects. Our understanding of
reading and text as a performative kind of practice has begun to take
shape. For Rita Raley, text is “the whole of the event, its physical, logical,
and conceptual architecture; the enactment and experience; its temporal
structures; and associated social and juridical protocols” (2013: 21).
Similarly, for Johanna Drucker, we need to elaborate “a different conception of
artifacts (books, documents, works of textual or graphic art), one in which
reception is production and therefore all materiality is subject to
performative engagement within varied, and specific, conditions of encounter” 
(2014).

Electronic Literature Instructions

Though a sizeable body of e-lit scholarship has focused on matters like
textuality, software, meaning making systems, code, preservation, etc. reading
has not been at the forefront. The experimental qualities of e-lit have
produced a great diversity of interaction modalities and ways of handling the
objects that supports said experimentation. Nevertheless, an understudied
convention of e-lit are the instructions accompanying most works. These
instructions go from some of the most radically sensuous like
Serge Bouchardon’s Blow, “Blow to read the text then to spread the words. This
scene requires a microphone” (Fig 1); to more conventional ones like “click
your mouse at the right edge of the screen to move right to a new region of
texts [and] tap the arrow keys to move” from Nick Montfort and Stephanie
Strickland’s Sea and Spar Between (Fig 2).

Blow

Blow to read the text then to spread the words. This scene requires a
microphone. If you don't have one, click on "refuse".

Click to continue

Fig 1. Screenshot from Serge Bouchardon's Blow

Sea and Spar Between is a poetry generator which defines a space of language
populated by a number of stanzas comparable to the number of fish in the sea,
around 225 trillion. Each stanza is indicated by two coordinates, as with
latitude and longitude. They range from 0:0 to 14992383:14992383. To operate
the system, you may

•    move your mouse;

•    press the spacebar to mark the stanza that is in the center of the screen
of that moment, bringing its coordinates into the navigation box at the bottom
in order to note them and return to this view;

•    dick your mouse at the right edge of tire screen to move right to a new
region of texts (to increase tire first coordinate); dick your mouse at the
bottom, left, or top to move similarly in those directions;

•    tap tire arrow keys to move the visible lattice of stanzas up, right,
down, or left by a single stanza;

•    scroll the wheel on your mouse or tap the A and Z keys on the keyboard to
zoom in and out;

•    type a pair of coordinates into tire navigation box at the bottom and
press enter to move anywhere in tire sea of text.

Fig 2. Screenshot from Nick Montfort and Stephanie Strickland's Sea and Spar
Between

The paratextual dimension of these instructions has been on the margins of the
studies focusing on particular works. Cumulatively, however, the information
kept on these reading instructions can signal the shifts that e-lit has enacted
on reading in digital platforms. Even more broadly, as a sample of the many
experimental and still unstable standards of reading in digital platforms,
e-lit reading instructions can offer evidence of practices that may be
becoming more integral to the act of reading. Similarly, the mentions of the
hardware (mouse, microphone, keyboard, etc.) required to read e-lit works
provide detailed insights on the historical role that technological
developments have enacted on reading as a performative engagement.

Metadata and Description

The new affordances offered by e-lit increase the scope of bibliographic
practices in ways that allow for more coordinated retrieval but also create
greater depth and specificity in records as datasets. Many descriptive metadata
standards have been largely shaped by the predominance of print media, and
while its qualities overlap with those of e-lit, emerging characteristics of
the latter require extensible structures to be considered
comprehensively described. E-lit specific metadata sets have been developed by
initiatives like Electronic Literature as a Model of Creativity and Innovation
in Practice (ELMCIP) and the Electronic Literature Directory (ELD). However,
among them there is still a variety of descriptive approaches and objectives.
The Consortium on Electronic Literature (CELL) has taken significant steps
towards interoperability and a “consensual model for the object of this field” 
(Baldwin) while still acknowledging the particular interest of individual
archives and datasets. Efforts like this may still be enhanced through
greater reconciliation with existing bibliographic procedures. In e-lit the
interaction between a work and a reader poses new ontological considerations
for descriptive orientations suitable to examine the particularities of reading
in digital platforms. Hayles’ concept of intermediation proposes that the
emergent processes that occur when reading e-lit forms a dynamic heterarchy in
which both reader and work continuously inform and shape the trajectory by
which reading unfolds (2007:100). This process reframes the ontic nature of
work and reader, dissolving the duality into a single event. New qualities
surface as a result, highlighting the different modalities through
which intermediation occurs and inform bibliographic projects. Navigating these
qualities and the language with which they are described poses new
challenges for interoperability with similar collections in addition to being
synthesized into the extensive legacies of bibliographic practices.

The Handbook

A Handbook of E-Lit Reading collects screenshots of the reading instructions of
e-lit works and documents them according to storage medium (web, iPad, CD-ROM,
floppy disk, etc.), actions or gestures (blow, click, scroll, type, etc.) and
hardware (web cam, keyboard, mouse, microphone, etc.). The pilot target
corpus includes ~200 works from over twenty countries anthologized in the
Electronic Literature Collections Vol. 1, 2, and 3. The data extracted from the
instruction pages will be analyzed and cross- referenced in order to observe
emerging patterns like most common practices, most resilient ones, the rise and
fall of some of them, as well as the introduction of new technological
developments in hardware or software that have marked important shifts in the
creation and reading of e-lit. This corpus, though not exhaustive, provides a
starting point to design a suitable metadata set and test the categories
included in it. Ultimately, the corpus will also encompass enough data to
start drawing a hypothesis and identify future directions for the project.

