The Game of Writing: Gamification and Social Commenting in Writing Instruction

Jinman Zhang

jinman@ualberta.ca

University of Alberta, Canada

Roger Graves

graves1@ualberta.ca

University of Alberta, Canada

Heather Graves

hgraves@ualberta.ca

University of Alberta, Canada

Geoffrey Rockwell

grockwel@ualberta.ca

University of Alberta, Canada

How can we test gamification and social learning in online writing
environments? This poster will demonstrate an online writing environment,
GWrit (Game of Writing), where students can comment on each other’s writing and
where they get rewards for task activity in a cooperative environment 
(gamification in this instance is not competitive). The application of
game-based learning strategies to teaching writing shows promise, with one
study reporting that their role-playing game improved the quality of student
writing (Wang, Chen, Chang & Chan, 2016). GWrit has been developed by a
crossdisciplinary team of academics and programmers at the University of
Alberta over the past three years and has been used with over 1000 students.

This poster/demonstration brings together research on GWrit from the following
perspectives: gamification, social-network influenced peer review, and the task
completion structures. Our research will be summarized on the poster and we
will demonstrate the environment during the poster session.

Gamification. Deterding (2011) defined gamification as the use of game elements
and game design techniques in non-game contexts to engage people in solving
problems. Gamified environments employ a number of mechanisms to encourage
people to engage with them (Dicheva et al., 2015), and existing studies prove
that gamified learning environments create deeper engagement of students 
(Barata, Gama, Jorge & Goncalves, 2013; Fitz-Walter, Tjondronegoro & Wyeth,
2012). Our gamified environment has many “surface” (award trigger systems,
competitive environments, badges, and ranks) as well as “deep” gamification
components (task completion structures, social commenting support, public
posting of draft documents).

When demonstrating GWrit we will first introduce the way the system was
designed to support experimenting with commenting and gamification, and then
show the gamification rule editing environment we developed. Our working
hypothesis was that users want information about what they are doing and that
gamification can be a playful way of representing that information back to the
users so that they can make decisions and possibly be motivated differently.

Social-network influenced peer review. Social networking has also been shown to
have a positive influence on students’ academic learning (Tian, Yu, Vogel &
Kwok, 2011; Tsuiping , 2016). Within GWrit we provided an environment where
students have the opportunity to both read and then comment on each other’s
drafts, a technique that has been shown to improve writing (Schunn, Godley, &
DeMartino 2016; Ion, Barrera-Corominas & Tomas-Folch, 2016). Reading skill is
directly linked to writing improvement, particularly if students are
reading texts similar to the texts they are trying to produce (Hansen, 2013).
GWrit allows students to post drafts of their documents for review and comment
by other students, peer tutors, and graders. The writer of the draft can
respond to each comment, and they are also likely to reciprocate by reading and
commenting on the drafts of the students who gave them comments. Micro-networks
of comments sprout up within the comments on these texts. Because students in
the writing course version of GWrit have the option of working on one of three
different assignments in each module, larger, informal networks of students who
are working on the same assignment also coalesce. The writing course version of
GWrit has four main three-week long modules with a choice of three
assignments in each module; the social networks re-form at the end of each
module. Our early assessments of students and commenting in the writing course
confirm what others have reported: that peer feedback is as valuable
as instructor feedback (Guasch, Espasa, Alvarez, Kirschner 2013).

Task completion structures. Third, the poster will deal with the role task
completion structures play in motivating learning. GWrit incorporates three
task completion structures to help students: the course completion fuel gauge,
a task list, and assignment deadlines. All three of these task
completion structures were used in WRS 102 in winter 2016 term and the first
and the last structures were used in fall 2015 term. The data on the task
structure from a course survey will be shown and discussed in the poster.

In our discussion of the research on the poster we will summarize interview
data on why we think the various aspects of the system work, which areas
we think need to be improved to work better, and how we intend to transform a
curriculum-based tool (the course-based version of GWrit) into a
free-standing, web-based site.

