Big-Data Oriented Text Analysis for the Humanities: Pedagogical Use of
the HathiTrust+Bookworm Tool

Sayan Bhattacharyya

sayanb@sas.upenn.edu

University of Pennsylvania, United States of America

Christi Merrill

merrillc@umich.edu

University of Michigan, United States of America

Peter Organisciak

organis2@illinois.edu

University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

Benjamin Schmidt

b.schmidt@northeastern.edu

Northeastern University, United States of America

Loretta Auvil

lauvil@illinois.edu

University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

Erez Lieberman Aiden

erez@erez.com

Rice University, United States of America

J. Stephen Downie

jdownie@illinois.edu

University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign

United States of America

The HathiTrust Bookworm (HT+Bookworm) is an interactive tool for visualizing
content from the HathiTrust Digital Library, which contains almost 15 million
volumes of digitized text (Auvil et al. 2015). Our poster describes the
application of HT+Bookworm in teaching. Studies show that the complexity of
integrating into pedagogical practice text analysis tools operating over large
datasets is a significant barrier to their uptake (Green et al. 2016), and that
the best solution is to use a pre-populated text analysis tool (Sinclair and
Rockwell 2012, Rockwell et al. 2010). HT+Bookworm accomplishes this
by facilitating exploration of the “big” textual data of the HathiTrust Digital
Library’s collection without requiring mastery of complex technology. We
recently used HT+Bookworm in class sessions co-taught by two of us as part of
literature classes at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor to undergraduate
students who had no prior familiarity with quantitative approaches to text
analysis. One of our objectives was to help students discover how the meanings
of words can vary — both when word meanings change over time, and when the same
word, when borrowed from one discipline or domain and applied to a
different discipline or domain (or simply applied independently in two
different domains), takes on separate meanings.

Rens Bod argues that it is only when humanistic disciplines are compared on a
large scale that patterns across them become visible (Bod 2013). HT+Bookworm
enables the discovery of such patterns by facilitating comparison across
categories of knowledge. While search engines are adept at finding individual
texts within a digital library, Bookworm performs a different task —
abstracting across categories within the library and visualizing
those abstractions. These abstractions, which are a form of ‘distant reading’
(Moretti 2013), are generated in the context of a specific textual fragment
(for example, a word or phrase), through the variation of some attribute of the
manifestation of that text fragment across the categories defined by some
categorization scheme. A typical categorization scheme is the organization of
the digital library by Library of Congress (LoC) classes as metadata, and a
typical attribute of the manifestation of a word or phrase across categories is
its normalized frequency of occurrence across those categories.
HT+Bookworm works with both discrete sets of categories such as LoC classes as
well as with continuous categories such as time. A time-series plot of the
normalized frequency of occurrence of a word over a chronological range, within
certain specified LoC classes, provides a sense of how the relative occurrence
of that word or phrase has varied across those LoC classes over the
specified time range. Students generate visualizations consisting of layered
time-series plots (stacked area charts) for the relative frequency of their
words of interest, within determinate categories of interest in the HathiTrust
Digital Library collection. These categories correspond to the layers (stacks)
of the plot, with each layer encompassing an LoC class and time represented
along the x-axis. The HT+Bookworm tool also provides, at each point in the
plot, a subset list of volumes that contribute the most to the attribute being
plotted. This list, accessible by mouse-click at the requisite point, serves as
the gateway to the digitized text of the individual volumes in the list.
This affordance helps students bridge the gap between the abstraction of
distant reading and the discovery of specific texts that they can then
investigate further through close reading.

Our poster includes instances of the kinds of exploration HT+Bookworm made
possible for students. An example follows. The concept of “fidelity” (an
important word to explore in connection with translation studies, a topic of
the classes) shows different characteristics when explored in English (in which
the concept maps onto the two words “fidelity” and “faithfulness”) and in
Spanish (where the concept maps onto the single word “fidelidad”).
Investigating the occurrence of the word by LoC category allows students to
explore hypotheses such as whether the greater strength, historically speaking,
of religious tradition in the Spanish-speaking world in comparison with the
Anglophone world affects the relative prevalence of this word in different
domains of use. Another example is a stacked area chart for a word of a kind
for which HT+Bookworm helps provide an understanding of the word’s
differentiated meanings in different use categories (for example, in the case
of the word “depression”, in the use category of psychology and medicine versus
that of economics). HT+Bookworm accomplishes this by abstracting separately
across different LoC classes, while aiding in the indication of the points in
time at which, for each class, the word entered widespread usage.

Moretti, F. (2013). Distant Reading. London: Verso.

Sinclair, S. and Rockwell, G. (2012). “Teaching Computer-Assisted Text
Analysis: Approaches to Learning New Methodologies.” In Brett D. Hirsch (ed.),
Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge,
U.K.: OpenBook Publishers, pp. 241-64.

Rockwell, G, Sinclair, S., Ruecker, S. and Organisciak, P.

(2010). “Ubiquitous Text Analysis.” paj: The Journal of the Initiative for
Digital Humanities, Media, and Culture, Vol. 2, No. 1.

