ELLE the EndLess LEarner: Exploring second language acquisition through
an endless runner-style video game

Donald F. Merritt II

don.merritt@ucf.edu

University of Central Florida, United States of America

Emily Kuzneski Johnson

emily.johnson@ucf.edu

University of Central Florida, United States of America

Amy Larner Giroux

amy.giroux@ucf.edu

University of Central Florida, United States of America

Games have been used to help people learn

throughout history (Vankus, 2005). Video games are

interactive and encourage active learning

(Dominguez, Saenz-de-Navarrete, de-Marcos, Fernan-dez-Sanz, Pages, &
Martinez-Herraiz, 2013; Watson, Mong, & Harris, 2011) more so than learning via
lecture or textbook reading. The interactive nature of games also makes them
engaging to the player. Student engagement is an essential component of
learning (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris 2004; Hall, Ramsay, & Raven, 2004;
Kahu, 2013). Most scholars agree that games, when designed well, can increase
student learning and retention (Ricci, Salas, & Cannon-Bowers, 2009) as well as
motivation (Gee, 2003; Fullerton, 2014; Eichenbaum, Bavelier, & Green, 2014).

Sykes and Reinhardt (2013) define game-based second language learning and
teaching as the “use of games and game-inclusive synthetic immersive
environments” (p. 5) that are designed specifically for second language
learning contexts. They also state that few game-based spaces are available
specifically for second language learning purposes. Scholars have noted the
unintentional effect on second language learning that commercial games can
have, for example, children in countries where English is not commonly spoken
have been observed as acquiring knowledge of the language as a means to play
the game (S0rensen & Meyer, 2007). Other research has focused on
second language-learning interactions that learners form in multi-player video
environments, including those associated with video game chat rooms (Ryu,
2013). Although some video games that target language learning have emerged,
such as Croquelandia, Language Island, Mentira, MIDDWorld Online, and Zon
(Sykes & Reinhardt, 2013), much research remains to be done in the efficacy of
this game genre. The central question guiding our research is: How can a
videogame best be designed to effectively enhance student second
language acquisition?

To answer this question, we turn to Ellis's (1985) recommendations to
facilitate language learning: the quantity of input directed at the learner,
the learner's perceived need to communicate in the second language, and the
here-and-now principles. Current second language pedagogy also stresses that
learning should be authentic and goal-oriented. Drawing on socio-cultural
theory, researchers have linked second language acquisition with a “language
game” (Lantolf, 1997), explaining that play can allow learners to rehearse
linguistic forms they already know and to experiment with new input in a
low-pressure environment. The game we are developing will satisfy
Ellis's requirements for the quantity of input, the necessity for competency in
the language (to advance in the game), and the “here-and-now” principle, in
addition to authenticity and goal-orientation.

This session will explain and demonstrate ELLE the EndLess LEarner, a game
prototype designed to enable the study of secondary-language acquisition
through an endless runner game platform. The system is designed so that
different game features, specifically auditory, visual, and textual cues, can
be modified easily by a researcher and the efficacy of each studied in relation
to language acquisition and the game platform. The platform has been designed
in this way to allow for research into the impact of these different cues
and input methods on the activities being studied.

The style of ELLE is an “endless runner,” which means that the player's avatar
is continuously in motion, “running” through the game environment. For example,
the iOS game Temple Run 2, continuously moves the player forward, without
allowing the avatar to stop. The only controls available to the player
are turning right or left, and jumping over or ducking under obstacles. The
player cannot control the speed of motion though it can be manipulated through
in-game objects. This game style results in a fast pace requiring players to
react rapidly, and it has great potential to increase student motivation and
engagement in the types of common sense practice exercises that help solidify
vocabulary acquisition. ELLE is being designed in conjunction with modern
language researchers and is grounded in the scholarship of language learning
theories and evidence-based pedagogical methods.

We chose an endless runner style videogame to address a number of practical
concerns, as scholars assert that the connection between game mechanics and
intended argument must be intentional (Bogost, 2007). First, this popular style
of game is intuitive and easy to play. Next, we believe the endless runner
style, being a casual game, will be less intimidating for learners who do not
identify as “gamers.” The fast pace of this style requires rapid recall and
provides immediate feedback in a low-consequence environment that lends itself
to repeated play and therefore repeated reinforcement of the content. Endless
runner games limit player choices within the game, which allow for an increased
emphasis on the language terms being practiced. Finally, this prototype,
initially focusing on vocabulary acquisition, lays the groundwork for
future iterations of the game as an on-demand language practice tool that will
have the ability for instructor modification of content.

We have chosen Portuguese as the initial language for ELLE to teach, as it is
one of the most important world languages today. As the sixth most spoken
language in the world, the Portuguese language is a gateway to the cultural and
economic opportunities of Brazil and the rest of the Portuguese-speaking
world. From Portugal to the emerging economies of Africa, the Portuguese
language has over 200 million native speakers, is an official language in nine
countries, and is spoken on three continents. The US government considers
Portuguese to be a language of “critical need,” especially because of the
nation's trade relations with Brazil.

ELLE is being designed as a game system that can continue to be studied and
built upon over time. The team's initial goal is for ELLE to function as the
center of a variety of studies to increase understanding of second language
acquisition. ELLE is being designed using the Unreal Engine and readily
available tools and tutorials, to reduce costs and to allow for increased focus
on the variety of cue types that are of interest to the research team. This
game prototype style, with its manipulable components, will allow the team to
quantify the effects of different game features and player actions.
Additionally, the components can be used to increase accessibility and to adapt
the game based on player needs. This empirical data can then be leveraged and
further explored to increase the efficacy of language learning games.

Our research will work to identify what motivates

and engages SLA learners, relying on self-determination theory (Ryan, Rigby, &
Przybylski, 2006) to ensure an appropriate balance of intrinsic and extrinsic
motivational strategies. The design team's collaboration with modern language
instructors has identified a lack of postsecondary level SLA supplemental
tools that students find motivating; therefore, this prototype has the
potential to inform improvements to future tools for second language
instruction. This game is intended to act as a supplement to instruction
and other classroom activities, rather than a replacement. Because student
motivation is such a major factor in learning, the learning research undertaken
as part of this project will also examine student engagement using the model of
mastery and performance goal orientation (De Clercq, Galand, and Frenay, 2014).
Mastery of second language concepts will motivate some students while others
may focus on their performance against their peers. In addition to testing the
game feature of textual, visual, and auditory cues, the team is also
investigating the impact of game mechanics such as leader boards on student
motivation.

The team's long-term goal is to create a robust database-driven game that can
be easily customized to teach vocabulary words / phrases / pictograms from any
semiotic domain, regardless of language or subject, particularly at the primary
and secondary school levels. ELLE will be leveraged to research socio-cognitive
variables of domain language acquisition. Such socio-cognitive variables
include questions about how the gaming environment influences learners'
motivation and how the interaction within the multimodal space of a video game
could be affected by different aspects of identity, for example, gender.
Potential semiotic domains could even include STEM subjects such as chemistry
and biology. In other words, the proposed project will allow the investigative
team not only to develop an effective game through which to introduce a second
or additional language but, ultimately, to allow the team to explore both
cognitive and social aspects of language acquisition.

