What's in a word? Exploring words and their usage in the Dictionnaire Vivant de
la Langue Française

Clovis Gladstone

clovisgladstone@gmail.com

ARTFL Project, University of Chicago United States of America

Charles Cooney

chu.cooney@gmail.com

ARTFL Project, University of Chicago United States of America

Tim Allen

timothy.d.allen@gmail.com

ARTFL Project, University of Chicago United States of America

Originally funded by a startup grant from the National Endowment for the
Humanities, Le Dictionnaire Vivant de la Langue Française (DVLF) is an
experimental approach to dictionary compilation that aims to push the
boundaries of what typical dictionaries offer. It is being developed as
an interactive, community-oriented alternative to traditional methods of French
lexicography, bringing together user-submitted definitions and definitions from
standard French dictionaries (multiple editions of the Dictionnaire de
l'Académie Française, Dictionnaire de Littré...), synonyms, pronunciation,
as well as a wealth of information on word usage through the use of various
computational methods. Our poster will show the DVLF’s functionality, as well
as demonstrate its originality.

Fundamentally, the most important aspect of the DVLF is that it aims to create
an environment in which its user community rates, critiques, and adds to
the collection’s resources as it sees fit. As such, we have made a conscious
effort to facilitate community engagement by allowing users to contribute to
most sections of our website: definitions, usage examples, synonyms and
antonyms. To date, users have added or submitted definitions/examples for
hundreds of words, including alexithymie, digiscopie, foucade, and nyctalope.
The new version of our site (released in January 2017) has been further
enhanced to enable such engagement thanks to more visible links inviting users
to contribute content, as well as a new responsive interface designed to work
equally well on mobile devices and desktop computers.

In order to attract and engage the largest possible user community, the DVLF is
entirely free and open source, and requires no registration. Internet users
at large can access the site's resources and contribute material. The DVLF thus
tries to adapt to changing word usage and incorporate neologisms so that
users will be able to select the word senses and usage examples that they feel
are most consistent with contemporary usage. In this manner, the DVLF
mirrors the social and evolving nature of language, expanding upon the
dictionary's traditionally normative role by giving French speakers and
learners access to lexicographic tools so that they might interact with
the evolving meaning of words and determine their own understanding of the
language.

Over the last year, ARTFL has been working to develop and improve the DVLF. We
noticed from statistics gathered from Google Analytics that our community of
users was very diverse, accessing our website from Morocco, Tunisia, Canada,
and many other francophone and non-francophone countries. This led us to focus
a large part of our effort on diversifying content, including usage examples
from a wider range of francophone sources in order to provide more coherent
descriptions of emerging word usage from Francophone communities around
the world, and therefore attract a larger global user base.

Over the course of this redevelopment effort, we decided to rewrite the entire
codebase given the various reliability and performance issues we
had experienced, switching from a Python-only infrastructure to a Go/Javascript
environment. We have also worked to add additional contextual information to
our content, starting with the most frequent collocates of any given word based
a corpus of over 7,000 texts of French literature from the Middle-Ages to the
late 20th century. Additionally, following the lead of recent work in
computational linguistics and natural language processing, we also now provide
the nearest neighbors based on the computation of word vectors using a
word-embedding technique called Swivel. While we could have used alternative
algorithms such as word2vec or Glove, we decided to use Swivel because it does
not solely rely

only on word co-occurrence to construct vectors. The benefit of Swivel's
approach is that it can yield similar words that do not actually occur together
in the corpus (see Shazeer et al, 2016), which we thought was a valuable
approach given that our dictionaries span across multiple centuries. To
generate this word vector model, we used the same 7,000 texts and
then extracted the top 20 words for every headword in our dictionary index,
which is now displayed on the new version of our site.

[442-1]

Figure 2. New version of the site (went live on January 2017)


Appendix: Screenshots

[442-2]

Figure 1. Old version of the site (retired on January 2017)


