Mapping the Meshwork of the Independent Media Arts

Lindsay Kistler Mattock

lindsay-mattock@uiowa.edu

University of Iowa, United States of America

During the late-1960s and early 1970s, independent media artists imagined a
network of organizations that would support the production, distribution,
exhibition, preservation, and study of film and video not only in the known
centers of activity (New York City and San Francisco), but across all regions
of the United States. By 1980 the Media Arts Center Movement had gained
significant momentum leading to the establishment of the National Alliance of
Media Arts Centers (NAMAC). These centers included national players, such as
the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, along with regional organizations
like the Rocky Mountain Film Center and Pacific Film Archives, and other
metropolitan organizations like Pittsburgh Filmmakers (one of the oldest
remaining active media

arts centers). These organizations provided services

for artists - funding and equipment rentals - and to the surrounding community
- screenings, coursework, and study collections. NAMAC changed its nomenclature
in the mid-1990s to the National Alliance of Media Arts and Culture, yet the
legacy of the media arts center movement continues today. Mapping
the Independent Media Community (MIMC) is a project that seeks to illustrate
the impact of the individuals and organizations that were part of this larger
movement to support the development of independent media arts, not just in the
United States, but across the globe.

MIMC is currently in its first phase of development, generously funded by a
Major Project Grant from the University of Iowa. Partnering with Carnegie
Museum of Art (CMOA) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the MIMC team at the
University of Iowa has worked in conjunction with CMOA's Time-Based Media
Project (funded by a grant from the A.W. Mellon Foundation) to digitize and
provide access to records contained with the CMOA's Film Section Archives
(spanning 1970-2002). The MIMC prototype is based on the data contained within
the Film and Video Makers' Travel Sheet and Film and Video Makers' Directory
published between 1973 and 1987. The Travel Sheet, a monthly publication,
served as a social networking tool for media artists and media arts centers. At
no cost, artists could publish booked tour dates along with a general sense of
their travel schedule, while organizations posted the contact information for
their internal programmers, indicating a willingness to host makers. Over
the years, the Travel Sheet grew to include sections for new works available,
film festival announcements, and other advertisements of general interest to
film and video makers. The Directory, published in 1978 and 1979 included the
information of all of the individuals and organizations subscribing to or
listed in the Travel Sheet. From its humble beginnings as a single hand-typed
11x17 sheet of paper, the publication grew to include thousands of individuals
and organizations from all corners of the globe. Using the data from the 
Travel Sheet, this first phase of the MIMC project serves as a prototype for a
much larger and more robust application that will visualize data from a wide
variety of sources in order to provide a more comprehensive understanding of
the Media Arts Center Movement in the United States as well as global
independent media production, distribution, exhibition, preservation,
and study.

The MIMC database (built using the University of Sydney's Heurist Academic
Knowledge System) currently holds only a few years of the Travel Sheet
data. However, even this small subset of the data MIMC illustrates that the
Media Arts Center Movement was indeed successful in building a wide-reaching
network of organizations and individuals. The image below represents a sample
of data from New York-based artists reported between 1973 and 1975 in the Film
and Video Makers Travel Sheet (data from 26 artists residing in New York City
and New York state).

[443-1]

Figure 1: Selected event data from the Film and Video Makers Travel Sheet
1973-1975 (created with Palladio).


In the above image, the artists' home address is represented in blue while the
event location is represented in orange (the event locations are sized
according to the number of events, 99 total). This visualization demonstrates
the connections between organizations and individuals emerging from the data in
the Travel Sheet. Here we can see the beginnings of a network that extends
beyond the United States and into Europe and Canada. As data entry and analysis
continues, the data promises to demonstrate a global network of artists and
media arts organizations as a sample from the 1979 Film and Video Makers'
Directory illustrates, below.

[443-2]

Figure 2: Organizations (square) and Individuals (teardrop) from the 1979 Film
and Video Makers Directory

While the term network was the preferred terminology of the Media Arts Center
Movement, this is an overly simplistic understanding that masks the complexity
of the MIMC data. Anthropologist Tim Ingold argues that the lines of a network
are connectors, static points joining two nodes, that presume an absolute
connection that does not fully illustrate the complexity of the relationship.
In contrast, Ingold offers the concept of the meshwork, suggesting that
these lines are not connectors, but the “lines of becoming” from Deluze and
Guattari's rhizome (Ingold, 2013: 132). These lines do not meet - the nodes in
the network map instead represent knots and entanglements in the meshwork,
places where lines emerge and diverge rather than connecting in absolutes. The
mesh-work, like the rhizome, affords multiple narratives and entry points; it
offers no hierarchy or structure. MIMC seeks to offer this alternative mapping
of the mesh-work - the entanglements between artists, distributors, museums,
governmental bodies, local communities, and countless other actors in the
fabric of the independent media arts.

Unlike other digital humanities approaches to cinema and media history, like
Jeffrey Klenotic’s Mapping Movies, MIMC provides access not only to a
representation of the history of the independent media arts, but access to the
archives that hold these traces as well.

The MIMC data model includes the provenance for each discrete data point in the
database, linking individual records back to the primary source material from
which it was derived. These connections will afford opportunities to link
directly to the digital archives that hold the digital surrogates as these
records, allowing MIMC to serve as an extension of these archival collections
as a digital finding aid of sorts. In this way, MIMC is enfolded in the
archives; the project does not derive-from but is entangled-with the archival
organizations and other sites that hold the history that MIMC seeks to
represent, continuing to build the meshwork that entangles the various
organizations and individuals represented in the visualizations. In locating
and documenting these archival traces, MIMC provides an understanding not only
of the historical unfolding of the independent media arts and Media Arts Center
Movement, but of the archival-ization of this history as well - the project
itself becoming further enmeshed and entangled in the very history that it
seeks to uncover.

This brief paper will introduce the MIMC project and discuss the development of
the MIMC application as well as the potential impact of the project as a
Public Digital Humanities resource for scholars and for the archives that
collect and provide access to the primary source materials from which the MIMC
data is derived. In addition to the database and visualizations, by preserving
the source information for each record and linking to the digitized archival
records (or archival finding aids), MIMC links the archive of the independent
media arts that is distributed across archives, personal collections, the
active and inactive organizations that are part of this vast meshwork. While
there is still much work to be done, MIMC promises to provide widespread access
to historical data that can be reused and re-imagined beyond the initial bounds
of the project.

