DH Uncentered: Fostering Partnerships Within a Digital Humanities Network

Laura Braunstein

lrb@dartmouth.edu

Dartmouth College, United States of America

Scott S. Millspaugh

scott.s.millspaugh@dartmouth.edu Dartmouth College, United States of America

During the academic year 2014-15, Dartmouth College launched an informal
Digital Humanities initiative. Individual researchers and campus stakeholders
already constituted a loose digital humanities network at the college, and had
for years, but these projects had not been coordinated through any kind of
centralized infrastructure. In spring 2015, Laura Braunstein (Digital
Humanities Librarian) and Scott Millspaugh (Instructional Designer), proposed
to pilot a faculty residency program during the summer term. Funded by the
Dartmouth College Library and Information Technology Services (ITS), the
residency program had the following objectives:

•    to prototype a team-based approach to supporting digital humanities
projects that could be standardized for future implementation; and

•    to test the capacity of the Library and ITS to support digital humanities
projects without recourse to external sources of funding.

The project selected for the Residency Program Pilot was Multimedia in the Long
Eighteenth Century (MMLEC), led by faculty PI Scott Sanders
(Assistant Professor of French). The MMLEC project seeks to quantify the
frequency with which musical paratext, including both lyrics and musical
notation, appear in English- and French-language novels published between 1688
and 1815. Professor Sanders, John Wallace (Research Systems Engineer), and Jill
Baron (Romance Languages Librarian) had been collaborating on the project since
late 2014, and Sanders and Wallace had already presented a plan for the project
at the Digital Libraries for Musicology Workshop 2015. The Residency Program
Pilot allowed for the expansion of the core project team and funded the
employment of two student workers who created a trained data set under the
direction of Mark Boettcher (Senior Programmer and Analyst). The Pilot also led
to the involvement of the Digital Library Technologies Group (DLTG), which has
assisted in the creation of a bibliographic database, still in development, of
published French-language works from the eighteenth-century.

The Residency Program Pilot was successful in establishing a model for
institutional support of other DH projects in the pipeline at Dartmouth and
has allowed the Library and ITS to develop a process for evaluating and
prioritizing those projects. In the summer of 2016, we renewed the Residency
Program for another year with the Jamaican Slave Names Project (JSNP). Our
poster will narrativize the development of MMLEC and JSNP within the context
of the Residency Program and demonstrate how institutional support of a digital
humanities project can help foster community and cross-campus collaboration in
the absence of a dedicated DH program or center. We hope to dialogue
with colleagues at other international institutions present at DH2017 that have
established different models of support for digital projects in the arts and
humanities and to offer guidance to those that are initiating crosscampus
collaborations within a network of individual researchers, centers, and
administrative groups, instead of concentrating digital humanities
support within a single program or center.

