Mapping Violence: Visualizing State-Sanctioned Racial Violence on the Mexico/
Texas Border (19001930)

Jim McGrath

james_mcgrath@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Monica Martinez

monica_martinez@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Cole Hansen

cole_hansen@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Edward Jiao

edward_jiao@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

This poster will describe recent work on Mapping Violence, a digital project
that makes visible decades of state-sanctioned acts of violence in the United
States during the first decades of the twentieth century. From 1900 through
1930, vigilantes and Texas Rangers killed hundreds of ethnic and national
Mexicans along the Mexico/Texas border. "A man's life just wasn't worth much at
all," recalled eyewitness Roland A. Warnock, "There were so many innocent
people killed in that mess that it just made you sick to your heart to see it
happening." This period of conflict is one of the largest episodes of civil
unrest in American history and still impacts the struggle for justice and civil
rights that continues today in Texas and in America at-large. However, this
history is widely unknown. Like Visualizing Emancipation (University of
Richmond), Digital Harlem (University of Sydney), and other projects
that remind us of the hyperlocal stories and histories of particular geographic
regions, Mapping Violence aims to recover and make accessible lives, events,
and acts of oppression that continue to impact later generations in various
ways.

Mapping Violence is part of Refusing to Forget, a

public humanities initiative involving collaborators from Brown University,
Loyola, Texas A&M, the University of Texas, and South Texas College (among
others) that is working to raise awareness about this history of racial
violence and its legacies. Mapping Violence is complemented and informed by
additional endeavors by the Refusing to Forget team: academic articles and
books, applications for Texas historical markers acknowledging this history,
collaborations with Texas public school educators to develop curriculum, and
exhibitions of material with the Bullock Texas State History Museum. In Mapping
Violence, we envision a project that functions as a database of primary and
secondary sources for researchers studying this history, a curated and dynamic
resource for classroom use, a memorial space that honors and remembers
the victims of these acts of violence, and a corrective to historical
narratives and commemorations that erase or mute these moments in the history
of Texas, Mexico, and the United States.

This poster will document recent and ongoing work at Brown University on the
completion of the first public-facing iteration of Mapping Violence (currently
scheduled to launch in the fall of 2017). It will

provide an overview of the creation of a database of material derived from
primary and secondary texts, narrate the iterative processes of mapping and
annotating data about state-sanctioned violence, and consider the ways in which
the design of the project is informed by its stakeholders and its range of
imagined audiences (educators, academics, activists, students, among others).
The poster will highlight the significant roles undergraduate collaborators
(from a range of academic disciplines including Computer Science and Ethnic
Studies) have played in the project at various stages: as researchers,
programmers, designers, developers, and curators. We will also document
the project's timeline, workflow, and challenges. What are the challenges
inherent in creating a digital space that is both an act of commemoration and a
source of research (challenges faced by projects with similar inclinations like
Our Marathon: The Boston Bombing Digital Archive and The 9/11 Digital Archive,
among others)? In what ways can database creation and digital curation
productively remediate and recontextualize controversial historical events for
public audiences? How do we navigate desires to tell hyper-specific,
localized stories about individual victims of violence with inclinations to
inventory and resituate these events within larger narratives about race,
gender, and nationalism?

A working demo of Mapping Violence will accompany the poster, provided there is
room and available resources to do so.

