Shelf life: Identifying the Abandonment of Online Digital Humanities Projects

Luis Meneses

ldmm@uvic.ca

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Richard Furuta

furuta@cse.tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

The Internet, along with the advent of online technologies has provided
researchers with greater opportunities to collaborate and create a myriad
of digital projects. Taking our research group as an example, we have
collaborated in creating online art catalogs (Meneses et al., 2011), interfaces
for visualizing and creating poetry (Meneses et al., 2013), and tools for
analyzing and exploring Shakespeare’s plays (Meneses et al., 2015, Meneses et
al., 2016a). However, the convenience and familiarity of computer networks
makes us forget (or overlook) that there is a certain fragility associated with
our online tools. In turn, this fragility threatens the completeness and
the sustainability of our work over time.

Nowadays, a large portion of the research carried out in the digital humanities
includes an online project as one of its components. In turn, these digital
projects can be catalogued as distributed resources, which implies that the
administrative control of information related to a topic may be spread across
online resources and/or collections maintained by multiple scholars in
different institutions. This administrative decentralization can lead to
changes in content that are often unexpected by a researcher.

These unexpected changes can be caused by different factors or circumstances.
Changes can occur because of deliberate actions on part of the collector -for
example, reorganization of the structure of the collection, switching to a
different content management system, or changing jobs and institutions. Changes
might also be due to unexpected events - earthquakes, power outages, disk
failures, -or may be due to other uncontrollable factors - death, seizure of
computers by law enforcement, or termination of the services from an Internet
Service Provider (Mccown et al., 2009).

Over time, great strides have been made to harness and manage the fragility of
online resources. Klein and Nelson argued that digital documents do
not disappear from the Web, but leave artifacts that can be used to reconstruct
them (Klein et al., 2011). Bar-Yosseff et al. carried out experiments to
measure the decay of the Web (Bar-Yossef et al., 2004). SalahEldeen determined
that nearly 11% of shared resources will be lost one year after being published
and that this decay will continue at a 0.02% rate per day (Salaheldeen and
Nelson, 2012). Nevertheless, and despite these previous efforts, managing
and characterizing change in online environments is a complex problem.

Recently, our research group has been focusing on analyzing the perceptions of
change in distributed collections (Meneses et al., 2016b). However, we believe
that the inherent characteristics of online digital humanities projects present
an interesting (and unique) area for inquiry for two reasons. First,
the research aspect of digital humanities projects hinders our previous
approaches - as our methods for identifying change in the Web do not fully
apply. And second, digital humanities projects have a limited useful life -
which is accompanied by research from primary investigator, which may or may
not be indicated by updates in the project’s content and tools. We have seen
many cases of successful projects in digital humanities (that fulfill their
original objectives and achieve their expected level functionality)
that interestingly become abandoned at some point in time. Examples of
abandoned successful projects include the Cervantes Project and the TAMU
Herbaria Project. This abandonment might be caused by a different set of
reasons -which are not often apparent to its users- such as loss of funding,
change in personnel or simply decay in interest. We believe that all these
reasons are worthy of study.

All this reasoning led us to formulate the following question: When can online
digital humanities projects be considered abandoned? In this paper, we
propose to present a study on the persistence and average lifespan of online
projects in the digital humanities. More specifically, we will elaborate on
their reliance on distributed resources and methods for measuring their shelf
life: the average length of time that a digital project can endure without
updates until it can ultimately be considered abandoned by its researcher.

Furthermore, we believe that “abandonment” is not necessarily a sufficient
designation —as there are different nuances involved. We will proceed
to elaborate on them using one of our online projects as an example. Digital
Acting Parts is an online project that encourages active reading and
memorization, which in turn leads to a better understanding of Shakespeare’s
plays. The project has been active since 2013, but online development has
shifted to a set of different processes that are carried out behind the scenes.
Consequently, the project’s online presence has not been updated for some time
now (we estimate that it has been at least a year). However, the online tools
are quite stable at this point. In this specific case, the lack of updates and
new content is not a signal of abandonment. This is clear example of why the
rules for traditional websites do not fully apply and new metrics are needed to
identify issues concerning online projects in the digital humanities.

Our study is an attempt to categorize change in a very specific domain. As an
attempt of categorization, determining the degree of abandonment affecting
a digital project over time is a difficult task. A Web resource may gradually
degrade from being correct to one that is still of some use by providing access
to related information or information about the institution to contact for more
information. Abandonment can also be hinted by changes in Web servers,
directory structures, etc., which may cause Web requests to still result in a
successful responses from a server, yet provide no valid information to
the requestor. Based on our findings, we approximate the average shelf life to
5 years, which aligns with reports from previous work (Goh and Ng, 2007).

Additionally, our study will touch upon on potential strategies for the
archival and the long-term preservation of abandoned digital online projects.
It is important to highlight that different levels of preservation and curation
are needed among digital projects. Historically, preservation efforts have
been primarily concerned with maintaining the primary artifacts in collections;
relegating descriptive metadata to a lesser level of importance. There is
an underlying notion that descriptive metadata is static: requiring minimal
resources to maintain and consequently making it easier to preserve.
However, our previous work (Meneses et al., 2016b) has shown us that this is
not the always the case.

To summarize, in this paper we propose to identify indicators of the
abandonment of digital humanities projects - as well as identifying their
average lifespan. Digital online projects in the humanities have
unique characteristics that make them impervious to the metrics that used in
the Web as a whole. In our opinion, these unique characteristics make
them worthy of study. In the end, the purpose of our study is to gain a better
understanding of digital humanities projects, their lifespan and formulate
better strategies for their long-term preservation.

