Playful Instruments: Reimagining Games as Tools for Research and
Scholarly Communication

Jon Saklofske

jon.saklofske@acadiau.ca

Acadia University, Canada

In academic contexts, digital games are often studied as texts or are used as
pedagogical tools to teach basic concepts in early education situations. Less
usefully, their systems and economies are often co-opted and decontextualized
in short-sighted attempts to “gamify” various aspects of learning or training.
It’s no wonder that digital games often appear as a marginal endeavor in
Digital Humanities practices, despite their relative compatibility with
the broad scope of DH methods and perspectives. However, given that games are
highly controlled, conditional, choice-and-consequence-based, problemsolving
environments in which players are expected to interact with simulated settings
and elements after agreeing to take on particular roles and subject positions,
there are promising potential uses of these experiences in academic contexts
that have not been fully considered.

One of the unique ways that DH provocations and practices have managed to
create a critical lucidity is through making, through the construction
of prototypes and through discussions regarding alternative models of
perception, narrativity, organization and understanding, enabled through
the computer’s multi-media frame. DH work often defamiliarizes and
repoliticizes the forms and functions of communication and scholarly work,
and continues to challenge socially constructed and sustained institutional
habits by asking “What is the relationship between making, thinking, using
and critique?” “Thinking through” tools, prototypes, interfaces and platforms
and through the narratives that such processes construct,
DH-inspired experiments are slowly, but noticeably and provocatively expanding
opportunities for scholarly research and communication methods and means. Such
changes are the product of an imaginative resistance to traditional limitations
and habitual practices in our institutions.

Motivated by the imperative to explore alternative modes and methods of
scholarly research and communication, and guided by the values of open social
scholarship practices, this paper reconsiders games not as things to study, but
as instruments to study with. Given that games can function as simulations,
models, arguments and creative collaboratories, game-based inquiry can be used
as a potential method of humanities research and communication. While these
ideas have been explored in a preliminary way in relation to a few
different academic disciplines (Donchin, 1995; Boot, 2015; Mitgutsch and Weise,
2011; Westecott, 2011) this paper will make the case for a
humanities-calibrated consideration of the pragmatics and potentials
of game-based research, games as instances of critical making, critical
intervention and scholarly communication, and more complex forms of game-based
learning than those currently practiced.

This paper is not about shifting the focus of existing game paradigms and
practices to more productive and instructional/educational ends (as is often
done in “serious game” or “edutainment” design). It is an attempt to challenge
textually-dependent scholarship with game-based processes while
simultaneously challenging conventional game features and functions with
scholarly creativity and textual affordances. In other words, I am concerned
with renewing the process of scholarly inquiry in the humanities via game
creation and experience, akin to the richness of what Joanna Drucker describes
as “diagrammatic process.” I have also been inspired by Geoffrey Rockwell’s
attempt to avoid the term “serious games” while also promoting the idea that
developing and playing through games are viable ways of modeling and reflecting
on humanities based research activities.

Several examples will be discussed, including the use of the open-source Twine
program in my undergraduate and graduate classes as a simple and accessible
game-design engine. Twine can be used to construct environments which ask
critical, provocative questions, or which attempt to rhetorically persuade
players through interactive experience and interpellative role-playing.
Anna Anthropy’s Queers in Love at the End of the World, Porpentine’s Those We
Love Alive, Mattie Brice’s Blink, Kitty Horrorshow’s Daymare #1: Ritual, Pippin
Barr’s Burnt Matches, and Zoe Quinn’s Depression Quest, are examples of Twine
being used as an innovative and disruptive game engine. In addition, Merrit
Kopas’ book, Videogames for Humans, thoroughly explores and justifies the
diversity of game-based experiments in Twine: “Authors are doing things with
Twine that aren’t possible with traditional text. And at the same time, they’re
using interactive media to tell stories that mainstream videogames couldn’t
dream of telling” (Kopas, 2015: 11). My students have used Twine to engage
their peers in alternatives to essay communication, and working together to
design such experiences involves them in a collaborative form of critical
making. Composing a networked narrative in Twine is akin to constellating and
curating not only ideas, but multiple pathways through such ideas.
This critical mapping process is as important as the selective routing process
experienced by players, who trace particular storylines through the
environment.

The usefulness of such methods can be demonstrated through an assignment
submitted by Rebecca Wilson, one of my graduate students, who used the creative
process of designing a Twine-based experience to achieve the following research
goals:

1.    To better comprehend the relationship between William Blake’s creative
process, his biographical context and his prophetic works,

2.    To model and critique his complexity through an emulation of Blake’s
own disregard for temporal and spatial consistency and his
transitional unpredictability, and

3.    To explore the Twine engine as a site of utopian hope, utopian method
and heterotopic tensions (thus responding to and engaging with theoretical
ideas advanced by Michel Foucault (1984) and Ruth Levitas 2013)).

Addressing these questions through the methodology of building the gamespace
and producing a written reflection on the process is different from the
resulting game experience in which players role-play as William Blake,
interactively negotiating and determining causal links between everyday
experiences, inspirational visions and creative invention. However, both
opportunities demonstrate the variety of ways in which games, game engines, and
game platforms can be used as instruments for research, scholarly communication
and pedagogy. As well, given that Twine’s output is an HTML file that can be
served online and accessed through a web browser on multiple devices, Wilson’s 
work is now accessible to a much broader audience than an academic paper on
the same topic.

Another example of the ways that games can be used as research tools is an
in-progress project that is looking to generate feminist game prototypes
to facilitate new models, diverse approaches and different narratives to expose
war’s patriarchal morphology, to provoke a rethinking of
militarised masculinity in the real world and the persistence
of hyper-masculinity in idealistic representations of war. These games,
designed with alternative value sets to distinguish them from traditionally
masculine power fantasies are meant to challenge and realign the values that
players become reflexively used to perceiving and employing within mediated
scenarios of militarisation and armed conflict. The adoption of feminist
value-based design challenges habitual idealisations of war, violence and
hyper-masculinity in video game environments through feminist perspectives.
Multiple and contradictory feminist war game prototypes can be used to disrupt
habits of institutional/personal perception    and    practice    and

provocatively/performatively engage players with complex issues of violence,
gender and media culture. Incorporating feminist values into a game’s
design creates an intervention that promotes critical lucidity for players.

Identifying the need to confront and challenge traditional habits of head,
hand, heart and media representation when it comes to game-based perceptions of
war (which can reflect and configure attitudes towards war in general) is not
unique to this talk. Mary Flanagan, in “Practicing a New Wargame” discusses the
perceptual limitations reproduced by conventional wargames and calls for
alternative ways of imagining conflict resolution:

“We must look to transcend old conflict models, or we risk perpetuating the
damaging myth that there are limited ways of resolving conflicts.... It is
vital that game scholars, makers and players see these familiar models on
a continuum of change, so new play forms that model new solutions to our
problems can be invented. Our games are constantly evolving, and this means we
all have an opportunity, even a responsibility, to evolve with them and
push ourselves to model the world we wish to create.” (2016: 706)

Flanegan’s call is an important acknowledgement of game design and gamespace as
an opportunity to imagine new models. An effort to reimagine, pluralize and
critically engage with the ways that we realize and idealize the long history
of armed conflict via a critique of naturalized perceptual habits and
assumptions directly speaks to the broader need to expose, augment and erode
habitual ways of seeing, being, doing and narrating in the humanities.

These initial examples justify the use of games as research and scholarly
communication methods, as more than just new media texts to interpret, and
aligns them with current DH efforts to use computer technology as interventions
to challenge, critique and re-humanize systems, ideologies, and
habitual narrativities, to pluralize perspectives, confront complexity and
facilitate multiple models of perception and practice. The computer is a
flexible tool can be used in diverse ways to broaden our understanding of human
culture and to generate inclusive, inhabitable and thought-provoking
stories. By foregrounding the values of open social scholarship and engaging
with broader publics via mechanical extensions of perception and action,
these unconventional approaches work in connective, integrative and expansive
ways to avoid modelling humanities scholarship on more conventional
game mechanisms and goals that unproductively foreground acquisition,
exploration and competition. Bibliography

Boot, W. R. (2015). “Video games as tools to achieve insight into cognitive
processes.” Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 1-3.

Levitas, R. (2013). Utopia as Method. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.

Mitgutsch, K. and Weise, M. (2011). “Subversive Game Design for Recursive
Learning.” DIGRA 2011 Proceedings: Think Design Play.

Rockwell, G. (2003). “Serious Play at Hand: Is Gaming Serious Research in the
Humanities?” Text Technology, 2: 89-99.

Westecott, E. (2011). “Games as Research Tools” Vimeo, uploaded by Toronto
Digifest, 15 Dec.,

https://vimeo.com/33724936.

Donchin, E. (1995). “Video games as research tools: The Space Fortress game.” 
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, Computers, 27(2): 127-53.

Drucker, J. (2013). “Diagrammatic Writing.” new formations: a journal of
culture/theory/politics, 78: 83-101.

Flanagan, M. (2016). “Practicing a New Wargame.” In Zones of Control:
Perspectives on Wargaming. Eds. Pat Harrigan, Matthew G. Kirschenbaum & James
F. Dunnigan. Cambridge: MIT, pp. 703-708.

Flanagan, M., and Nissebaum, H. (2014). Values at Play in Digital Games.
Cambridge: MIT.

Foucault, M. (1984). “Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias.” Trans. Jay
Miskowiec. Architecture/Mouve-ment/Continuite, pp. 1-9.

Kopas, M., ed. (2015). Videogames for Humans. Instar.

