Digital Humanities Clinics -Leading Dutch Librarians into DH

Michiel Cock

m.p.cock@vu.nl

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Lotte Wilms

lotte.wilms@kb.nl

National Library of the Netherlands, the Netherlands

In 2015, an initiative was started to set up a Dutch speaking DH+Lib community
in the Netherlands and Belgium, based on the example of the American communal
space of librarians, archivists, LIS graduate students, and information
specialists to discuss topics ‘Where the Digital Humanities and Libraries
meet’. At the initial meeting it became apparent that most participants were
there to learn more about digital humanities and were not (yet) in the
situation where they were able to offer expertise on the subject. On
the administrative level, the directors of the libraries participating in the
consortium of Dutch academic libraries (UKB) also expressed the wish that
librarians become more fluent in DH.

A year later, the National Library of the Netherlands (Koninklijke
Bibliotheek), and the University Library of the Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam again concluded that librarians at their institutes who wanted to get
involved in DH needed more training to adequately support researchers and
students in this field. Therefore both institutes joined forces to develop a
set of clinics on DH for librarians. The two institutes were later joined by
the Leiden University Libraries. We see this as the ideal opportunity
to provide these educative sessions not only to our own librarians, but also to
the academic librarians of other Dutch research libraries. In essence, we want
to teach our country’s librarians the ins and outs of DH in order for them to
take up their natural role of facilitating and supporting research and ideally
become the research partner needed in DH projects.

The aim of these clinics is to provide basic methodological competencies and
technical skills in DH, for a diverse group of librarians, consisting of
both subject and technical librarians with basic technical skills. The content
of these sessions should enable them to provide services to researchers and
students, identify remaining gaps in knowledge or skills that they could
address by self-directed learning and (perhaps) to automate their daily library
work. We are not setting out to turn them into programmers or data crunchers,
but want to boost their knowledge level to where they feel comfortable
providing information about DH projects, follow the literature and
research, follow online tutorials and hopefully take up the challenge of
finishing this professional development by engaging with the DH community.

In order to design this curriculum we follow a four step approach with a
Working Out Loud-principle (Williams, 2010):

1.    Desk research about what being a DH librarian entails (e.g.
Hartsell-Gundy et al., 2015; Mulligan, 2016; also see the Zotero library of the
LIBER Digital Humanities working group);

2.    Identify possible subjects, based on experience, a comparison of
existing teaching material related to DH (e.g. The Programming Historian, the
Digital Scholarship Training Programme at the British Library and Columbia
University's Developing Librarian project) and the TaDiRAH taxonomy of research
activities;

3.    Get feedback from researchers on possible subjects, based on the
knowledge and skills they feel librarians need;

4.    Get feedback from librarians on possible subjects, based on already known
gaps in their knowledge and skills.

With these in hand, we will design the curriculum of clinics, based on the
method of 'constructive alignment' (Biggs et al., 2011), to make sure that
the intended learning objectives and the teaching/learning activities stay
aligned.

Our plan is to organize a maximum of 6 clinics, each one full day. Each day
starts with one or more lectures by researchers, that address the
conceptual knowledge needed. The afternoon sessions will be devoted to the
hands-on training of skills, following the Library Carpentry model as closely
as possible. By having researchers provide the lecture sessions, we hope to
fuel the enthusiasm of the librarians with the inspiration of direct contact
with researchers and to provide access to a network within and
across universities. With these clinics, we hope to initiate a stream of DH
activities in Dutch universities, making access to support easier for new
digital scholars.

The poster at DH2017 will present the curriculum, its position in the
international context and offer the lessons learned from both the design
process and the first clinics. We welcome discussion about our efforts and the
possibilities of applying this in other contexts. Bibliography

ACRL Digital Humanities Interest Group. (2012-) dh+lib

. http://acrl.ala.org/dh/ (accessed 31 March 2017g). Baker, J. (2014) British
Library Digital Scholarship Training Programme: a round-up of resources you can
use -

Digital scholarship blog. 30 October 2014. http://blogs.bl.uk/
digital-scholarship/2014/10/
brit-ish-library-digital-scholarship-training-programme-round-up-of-resources-you-can-use.html
(accessed 31 March 2017c).

Biggs, J. B., Tang, C. and Society for Research into

Higher Education (2011). Teaching for Quality Learning at University: What the
Student Does. Philadelphia, Pa.]; Maidenhead, Berkshire, England; New
York: McGraw-Hill/Society for Research into Higher Education : Open University
Press.

DARIAH (n.d.) TaDiRAH - Taxonomy of Digital Research

Activities in the Humanities

http://tadirah.dariah.eu/vocab/index.php (accessed 31

March 2017).

Hartsell-Gundy, A., Braunstein, L. and Golomb, L.

(2015). Digital Humanities in the Library: Challenges and Opportunities for
Subject Specialists. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries, a
division of the American Library Association.

Library Carpentry. (n.d.) Library Carpentry - Software skills for library
professionals http://librarycar-pentry.github.io/ (accessed 31 March 2017d).

Mulligan, R. (2016). SPEC Kit 350: Supporting Digital Scholarship. Association
of Research Libraries http://publi-cations.arl.org/
Supporting-Digital-Scholarship-SPEC-

Kit-350.

The Programming Historian (2012) The Programming Historian. http://
programminghistorian.org/ (accessed 31 March 2017e).

Wilms, L. (2017). Zotero | Groups > LIBER Digital Humanities working group
https://www.zotero.org/groups/li-ber_digital_humanities_working_group (accessed
31

March 2017f).

Williams, B. (2010). When will we Work Out Loud? Soon! TheBrycesWrite

https://thebryceswrite.com/2010/11/29/when-will-we-work-out-loud-soon/
(accessed 31 March 2017).

The Humanities and History Team at Columbia University. (2013) “The Developing
Librarian Project”. dh+lib.

1 June 2013. http://acrl.ala.org/dh/2013/07/01/the-developing-librarian-project
/ (accessed 31 March 2017b).

