Networks of the Great Awakenings: Classification of Puritan Sermons by
Word Usage Statistics

Michat Choinski

michalchoinski@gmail.com

Jagiellonian University, Poland

Jan Rybicki

jkrybicki@gmail.com

Jagiellonian University, Poland

Revivalism has always played a significant role in the social functioning of
religion in the US. As argued by McClymond, "religious revivals are as American
as baseball, blues music, and the stars and stripes" (2010, 306). This strong
presence of revivalism in the American religious landscape translates into the
considerable significance of revival preaching not only for the American pulpit
practice, but also for American culture in general. One could argue that a
certain continuity is discernible in the American revival tradition,
and preachers of consecutive "Awakenings", starting with the Great Awakening,
have utilized similar communicative strategies, analogous sets of cultural
references, as well as persuasive ploys to forward the "New Birth" to their
hearers and to spread the revival zeal. Billy Graham, the most celebrated
televangelist of the 20^th century, testified to the importance of this
tradition when in 1949 in Los Angeles, during the "Canvas Cathedral" Crusade,
he delivered to a contemporary audience the most notorious sermon of the Great
Awakening (and, perhaps, of America's entire pulpit oratory), Jonathan
Edwards's Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God. Graham was by no means a
pioneer in this respect, as the 19^th century American revivalists,
like Charles Finney, eagerly fell back on the rhetorical heritage of the first
Great Awakening sermons.

Crowds of thousands of people, the emotional reactions of the audiences which
often bordered on mass hysteria, fervent theological debates and a surplus
of publications played a significant role in the shaping of the early American
ecclesiastical order. Similarly, the American rhetorical tradition was strongly
informed by the revival developments in pulpit oratory, especially in the
context of both the oratory of the American Revolution and the Civil War. New
forms of preaching manifested the power of the spoken word, and propelled the
dynamics of public debate in a period which was to prove vital for the
development of American identity.

The study of American preaching tradition from the diachronic perspective seems
particularly important. Different groups of preachers in consecutive
Great Awakenings, (First 1735-1750, Second 1790-1840, Third 1850-1900, Fourth
1960-1980) appropriated the rhetorical models employed by the previous
generations and built upon their output.

However, because of the sheer size of the available corpus, the comparative
study of the preachers of all Great Awakening has been so far impossible.
Stylome-try based on word usage makes it possible to highlight the connections
between particular groups of preachers, as well as to demonstrate the evolution
of the American revival preaching tradition; and to confront these findings
with the existing attempts at classifica-tion/chronology (Stout 1986).

In our study, 42 collections of sermons by individual preachers (one text file
per preacher) have been collected, digitized and modernized to avoid an
excessive chronological bias due to spelling differences; of course, purely
linguistic bias could not be entirely eliminated. Of these, 13 are
traditionally classified as First Awakening; 9 as Second; 19 as Third; the
most traditionally controversial group, Fourth, is represented by Billy Graham
alone.

Classification was made by comparing distances, or differences, between
most-frequent-word frequencies of the texts using Burrows's Delta procedure
(2002); the distance measure applied was “Cosine Delta” as proposed by Jannidis
et al. (2015), implemented in the stylo package (Eder et al. 2015, 2016) for R
(). The word frequencies were submitted to a consensus procedure of cluster
analysis at word frequency vectors of 100 to 2000 most frequent words, and
these results then served to produce network diagrams in Gephi (Bastian et al.
2009) using the gravitational Force Atlas 2 algorithm (Jacomy et al. 2014).
This produces a network or a “map” of data points for the individual preachers'
sermons; the closer and the thicker the links between them, the more similar
they are.

Figure 1 presents such a network graph for the 42 preachers. The color coding
follows the traditional division into four “Awakenings” (from First,
green, through Second, yellow, Third, red, and Fourth, purple). A very strong
evolutionary pattern emerges;

apart from minor imperfections, the network shows a clear evolution from the
earliest preachers to the most modern one, Graham. At the same time, the
grouping of the data points suggest that a different classification might also
exist in the dataset. This is why another algorithm available in Gephi,
“Modularity,” was used to

discover these “communities,” or groups (Blondel et al.

2008).

[480-1][480-2]

Figure 1. The four Great Awakenings in traditional classification (top);
divided by modularity into 3 (center) and

4 (bottom) groups.

This produces two alternatives to the traditional division of the Revivalist
movements(s). In the first of

these (center), what is usually referred to as the First and the Second Great
Awakening would be merged into a single group, while the traditional Third
Awakening splits into early and late phases; the latter of

which now also included the single representative of the Fourth. Perhaps more
interestingly, computergenerated four Awakening communities (bottom) suggest a
First only limited to some of Edwards's contemporaries, a Second that extends a
little more than traditionally into the past, and again a limited early
Third with an expanded Fourth.

This is of course not to say that the above results

invalidate the traditional, or historical, division of American revivalist
writing. But the stylistic (or, at least, stylometric) divisions are no less
valid. Most-frequent-word usage is a significant element of distant reading;
and such a distant reading of the Revivalism

opens new avenues for close reading of the American homiletic tradition.

open source software for exploring and manipulating networks. International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Blondel, V., Guillaume J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.

(2008). Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment (10), P10008    (12pp)    doi:    10.1088/
1742-

5468/2008/10/P10008.

Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta': A measure of stylistic difference and a guide to
likely authorship. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17: 267-287.

Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: a suite of
tools. Digital Humanities 2013: Conference abstracts, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, 487-489.

Eder, M., Rybicki, J., Kestemont, M. (2016). "Stylometry with R: A Package for
Computational Text Analysis," R Journal 8 (1): 107-121.

Jacomy, M., Venturini, T., Heymann, S. and Bastian, M.

(2014). ForceAtlas2, a Continuous Graph Layout Algorithm for Handy Network
Visualization Designed for the Gephi Software. PLoS    ONE,    9(6): e98679.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098679.

McClymond, M. (2010). Revivals, in P. Goff (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to
Religion in America, Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Wien, http://www.R-project.org/.

Stout, S. (1986). The New England Soul. Preaching and Religious Culture in
Colonial New England. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Acknowledgements

This research is part of project K/PBO/000331, supported by Poland's National
Science Center.

