Public Humanities: In Search of a Field

Jim McGrath

james_mcgrath@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Robyn Schroeder

robyn_schroeder@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Inge Zwart

inge_zwart@brown.edu

Brown University, United States of America

Like the phrase “digital humanities,” “public humanities” has proven difficult
to pin down, even by practitioners who have come to value this term as
an accurate description of their research interests and institutional
affiliations. It has been a term used (primarily, but not exclusively, by
institutions of higher education in North America and by grant-funding
agencies like the National Endowment for the Humanities) to describe various
forms of cultural production: physical and digital acts of curation, archival
initiatives, community outreach, educational programming, and public arts
initiatives. It has ties to terms like “public history.” More recently,
investments in “public humanities” have more frequently intersected (and at
times elided) investments in “digital humanities,” given the public-facing
imperatives of many digital projects and practitioners. Are all digital
humanities projects also inevitably public humanities initiatives? When
the phrase “public humanities” is invoked, who is most often speaking, and to
what do they refer? Who is most likely to fund projects with explicit ties to
this term, and what communities are served and financed by these efforts? When
practitioners of public humanities write about the value of their work, who do
they cite? More generally, what forms, contexts, people, places, geographic
regions, occupations, and communities is the term “public humanities” tied to,
and who is missing, obscured, erased, or otherwise apart from
these conversations?

This poster will document recent efforts by public humanities practitioners at
the John Nicholas Brown

Center for Public Humanities and Cultural Heritage (Brown University) to survey
and reflect upon both the ten-year history of the Center (and its M.A. program
in Public Humanities) and, more generally, the state of “public humanities” as
a field of critical inquiry. Postdoctoral researchers and graduate students at
the Center have determined that the institutional memory of the Center would
benefit greatly from an indexed archive of primary materials (syllabi,
photographs, exhibition materials, student projects and writings, among others)
as well as a collection of oral histories from major figures in its history
(directors, staff, faculty, graduates, community fellows and collaborators),
and we are in the process of building this collection in collaboration with
representatives of Brown's Center for Digital Scholarship and the
Brown Library's digital repository service. We have also begun assembling a
database of texts (books, journal articles, grant application guidelines, blog
posts, and the language of Center / program recruitment literature, among
others) to better understand where and why the phrase “public humanities” has
been utilized between the late twentieth century (starting around 1970, in
Congressional documents that informed the creation of the NEH) and the early
twenty-first century. The poster will contextualize the motivations behind our
decisions to focus on particular corpora and the organization of our database.

Beyond the first iteration of this hyperlocal history (which will materialize
in the form of the first stage of the Center's collection in Brown's digital
repository and will be publicly available to researchers), we will concurrently
release a dataset of public humanities corpora and a series of visualizations
exploring that data. One will begin to map the geographic regions
and institutional ties to public humanities programs and grant-funded public
humanities initiatives. Another will document part of the citational history of
public humanities discourse by visualizing links between texts present in
bibliographic data of a sample set of academic texts. Representative samples of
these visualizations, which are not meant to be comprehensive so much as they
are intended to be models for potential avenues of inquiry, as well as the
methodologies informing them, will be featured in the poster. We will also link
these datasets to the crowdsourced data we receive from “Day of Public
Humanities” (#DayofPH), a digital project held in May of 2017 that, like the
“Day of Digital Humanities” initiative, aims to make the various forms of
day-to-day labor (and laborers) in the field visible and to encourage dialogue
across and beyond these contexts.

