Towards an Integrated Set of Annotations for Folktales

Thierry Declerck

declerck@dfki.de

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence University of Vienna,
Austria

Introduction

In this poster paper we describe very briefly different layers of annotation
for folktales we have been working in the past and which are in the process of
being integrated in one set of annotations, which is mediated by a formal
representation of the annotation elements in an ontological framework. We list
in this short text the various modules of this integrated annotation scheme.

A first approach to the annotation of folktales was done in the context of
cooperation between the European CLARIN project and the Dutch Amicus (Automated
Motif Discovery in Cultural Heritage and Scientific Communication Texts,
sponsored by a grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research, NWO Humanities, as part of the Internationalization in the Humanities
programme, from 2009-2012). In this context, we developed an extended
annotation scheme for the annotation of folktales with Proppian functions. The
scheme includes textual properties, temporal structures, characters, dialog
structures, and the Proppian functions (see Declerck et al, 2011 and Scheidel
and Declerck, 2010). This scheme was later used for supporting a first
information extraction system applied to tales (see Declerck and Scheidel,
2010), and comparing the results of this extraction with manually annotated
tales.

Building on this work, an automated linguistic analysis of tales was developed.
The goal was not only to detect characters of the tales, but also to provide
for a co-reference analysis such that the actions in which the characters are
involved can be fully specified, and thus helping for an automated detection of
Proppian functions, together with the involved personages. Results of the
analysis are stored in a database, which has been further developed onto an
ontological framework: Adding thus not only an annotation layer but also a
formal representation level (see Koleva et al, 2012, and Declerck et al, 2012).
The ontological representation allows also to apply generalisations for
the specification of the characters (human vs animals, or supra natural etc.).
The system was also able to operate reference resolution of the kind:
“daughter” can also be a “sister”, etc.

The move to the use of an ontological framework turned out to be very useful,
since further work on distinct elements of a tales could be easily integrated.
So for example, the work described in Eisenrecih et al (2014) considered the
detection of sentiments expressed by the characters of the tales. Such
sentiments (“joy”, “happiness”, “sadness” etc.) could be added in
a straightforward manner to instances of characters at the time span in which
they occur in the tales. In fact, the work in Eisenrecih et al (2014) mainly
addresses the issue of adding Text to Speech (TTS) functionality to the
automatic analysis of the text. The TTS system accesses the instances of the
characters in the populated ontology and can retrieve the information
on sentiment encoded there and correspondingly model the voice output of the
various characters (an example

using the tale “Frog Prince” can be heard, or preferably

downloaded, online).

Very recently, we started also looking at other metadata to be used for
annotating folktales, and to

see how to integrate those with the Proppian functions. We looked for this at
the well-known classification systems of Stith Thompson (1977), Antti Aarne
(1961) and Hans-Jörg Uther (2004) and we are starting to integrate those models
in our ontology. The resulting ontology from the Thompson Motif Index has been
presented in Kostova and Declerck (2016). Additionally we linked the detected
characters to WordNet, investigating if this can help for the disambiguation
of characters (Declerck et al, 2016).

As the most recent work we dedicated to the folktale topic dealt with with the
implementation of running systems, less attention was given into the extension
of the annotation scheme, work which is currently underway and which we present
as a poster at DH 2017.

