Topics and genre changes in Czech sociological articles

Radim Hladik

radim.hladik@fulbrightmail.org

Czech Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic

Introduction

Since Kuhn's distinction between “textbook” science and “article” science,
studies of scientific texts have established the social nature of academic
writing. Analysis of scientific texts can yield epistemological, disciplinary,
and historical insights. These texts are the arena in which knowledge claims
are raised (Myers 1985), trials of strength held (Latour 1987),
intradisciplinary boundaries drawn (Wolfe 1990), disciplinary histories traced
(Bazerman 1988). Genres of scientific texts have thus been shown as socially
enacted structures (Berkenkotter, Huckin, Ackerman 1994) rather than as
transparent styles. Despite their many merits, the hitherto available empirical
studies on scientific writing have been constrained by either a focus on early
history (such as the original Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society)
or reductive sampling for traditional content analysis that allow researchers
to grasp the otherwise immense textual data. Approaches inspired by digital
humanities approaches offer new possibilities of studying disciplinary
formations, as was demonstrated by Goldstone and Underwood (2014) in their
distant reading of literary studies texts. This paper follows suit in
reporting the results of applying digital humanities methods of text analysis
to the corpus of research articles in sociology, specifically, in Czech
Sociological Review. Writing in wide-scope disciplines, such as sociology, is
of particular interest because it embodies the conflict between literature and
the notion of social science (Lepenies 1988). Sociology has been revealed as a
discipline of two writing cultures, monographic and journal (Wolfe 1990). The
writing in sociology is also oscillating between the aspiration to the
positivist ideal of science (Leenhardt 1992) and the acceptance of diverse
styles (Agger 2002). Abbot and Barman (1997) have concluded, on the basis of
sequence comparison, that research articles in sociology lack “rhetorical
rigidity”. The discipline thus offers a particularly opportune resource for the
analysis of genre and topical variations. Czech Sociological Review was chosen
as an example of a “core” journal in the country. As Oroma-ner (2008)
demonstrated, “core journals” in sociology have tendency to become central to
the discipline's “intellectual integration”. Thus the results of the analysis
can be taken as indicative of the mainstream tendencies in Czech sociology. The
focus on the Czech sociology has the additional advantage of representing a
interesting example of a discipline undergoing substantial transformation in
the wake of academic and wider societal changes that came about with the fall
of the Communist Party regimes in 1989. Also, the journal offers open access to
its content. The data for the analysis were scrapped from the journal's website
in September 2016 and the resulting data set contains 3483 articles. A
preliminary exploration of metadata revealed noteworthy patterns around the
year in which a new policy for science evaluation had been introduced (cf. the
figure).

Mean no. of authors per article in Czech Sociology Review

[549-1]

1970    1980    1990    2000    2010

Years

The data collection and analysis is carried out using R language. Besides crude
measures of the corpus, the paper will also report the analysis of the textual
data, using text mining techniques to comment on the issues that have been
raised in the available literature. Topic modeling through LDA model will be
used to assess the topical changes across time. Annual frequencies
of particular words will be used as indices of changes of the transforming
disciplines (this includes, especially, the words relating contemporary
sociology to its “communist” variety, such as references to Marx
or “communism”). Multidimensional scaling will then be employed to reveal term
clustering around further keywords that arguably important in sociology.
Quantitative bias, or a lack of thereof, will be measured by the presence of
numbers. The overall purpose of the

analysis is to address the questions raised in pre-existing literature using
the specific example of a Czech social science discipline and to demonstrate
the usefulness of text mining techniques in the analysis of scientific writing.

