The Pushkin Digital Project

Gabriel Belyak

gabriel.belyak@gmail.com

Saint Petersburg State University, Russia

The Russian academic approach towards editing of the nineteenth-century
classics, in general, inherits German critical editing tradition. Typically,
the edition will include three basic sections: 1) critically
prepared definitive text of the work, 2) full critical history with the list of
all the discrepancies between its versions 3) commentaries including a
description of the manuscript and printed sources of the text, history of its
creation, a detailed historical and literary commentary based on all the
existing research about it, and finally explanatory notes to the text.

All the works of Dostoyevski, Chekhov, Turgenev and other XIX classics are
published this way.O nly one of the 19th century classics still does not have
his collected works academically edited. This exception is Pushkin, whose
exclusive place in Russian culture can be compared to Shakespeare’s in English,
Dante’s in Italian or Goethe’s in German culture. The reasons behind this
phenomenon are simply historical. The first attempt to publish a complete
critical edition of Pushkin's works was interrupted by the revolution and the
civil war, and the second was distorted by the personal order of Stalin. The
third attempt is being carried out now, when the government's
interests disregard any cultural values. The work towards finally making this
edition is conducted at the Institute of Russian Literature of the Russian
Academy of Sciences (Pushkin House). Today there are only four volumes
published but the amount of copies is 500 in average, and they are marketed
almost exclusively in St. Petersburg and Moscow.

The theme of this conference is Access. Low availability of any printed edition
today can be easily compensated by publishing it online. However, when we speak
about critical editions, the problem of accessibility obtains an entirely
different aspect. To use all the information the existing critical edition
of Pushkin's works provides, its readers should have a special philological
training. and if they have one, in order to actually conduct any work with the
materials provided they will require access to Pushkin's autographs, books,
magazines of the Pushkin's era and to all researches and papers upon which
the commentaries are based. And it goes without mentioning that readers are
expected to have a grasp of the main cultural realities of Pushkin's epoch, and
to be aware of Pushkin’s social and political surroundings. All this makes an
anticipated number of readers for this edition only slightly higher than
the number of experts who participated in its preparation. Unfortunately, all
this can be applied to almost all annotated critical editions. Yet it is
obvious that the information they contain can be interesting and useful for
every reader. The question is how to make academic publication available for
everyone without compromising the scope and depth of its material? And that is
the main challenge that stands in front of Pushkin Digital Project.

Developing this project we were thinking not only about how to publish
Pushkin's manuscripts, their decipherment and critical descriptions along with
the text and the commentary; our ambition was to create an edition that unlike
its prototype, which required a certain scientific competence of its reader,
would, on the contrary, be able to form such a competence. Our electronic
publications were to be addressed not only to researchers and students, but to
anyone who would like to have a deeper look into Pushkin’s world.

To accomplish that goal, we chose a simple and understandable architecture,
consisting of three main operational modes: Text - Commentaries -Manuscripts.
Each of these three sections has an autonomous meaning, and could be the sole
object for a special digital edition. However, within the framework of our
project, it was imperative for all three parts to be closely linked and
cross-referenced creating an informational entity, where the text, its history
and its context are inseparable from each other.

The Text section of the edition contains the definitive text of the work with
two main interacting tools. One tool gives the user the ability to read all
the commentary notes upon the text (which may include some external links to
music associated with the text and images relevant to this fragment). The
other shows all the lines that had any variations along the creation of the
text and links to the digitised sources of these variations in section
Manuscripts.

The section Manuscripts is a digital representation of autographs and/or
printed sources with full transcription and the estimated
chronological sequence of author's editings. When working with Pushkin's
manuscripts, the presence of a full

transcription has a special value due to the extreme intricateness and
illegibility of Pushkin's drafts (less than a dozen specialists in the world
are able to read it). This section contains a detailed
paleogeographic description of each manuscript together with the history of its
creation.

The Comment section - is the most voluminous section of the website. Academic
historical and literary commentary on Pushkin's works is formed as a reflection
and synthesis of all existing studies upon the subject (there is a special
department of the Pushkin House dedicated to accounting, describing,
and cataloging every book referring to Pushkin or his works (there is no
digital version). In the paper edition, this section appears as a coherent
and undivided text sometimes up to hundreds of pages. Without knowing its
structure and contents in advance, an unprepared reader will easily get lost in
it,

