Social Semantic Annotation with Recogito 2

Leif Isaksen

l.isaksen@lancaster.ac.uk

Lancaster University, United Kingdom

Rainer Simon

rainer.simon@ait.ac.at

Austrian Institute of Technology, Austria

Elton T. E. Barker

elton.barker@open.ac.uk

The Open University, United Kingdom

Pelagios Commons (Pelagios Commons 2017) is a community of practice dedicated
to supporting Linked Open Data-related activity within the
humanities. Comprising a series of interconnected Special Interest Groups, it
operates through the collective establishment of digital conventions for
semantic data and produces software to facilitate its production and use. Such
data can ultimately be used to interconnect independently maintained and
heterogeneous online resources about the past. While Pelagios Commons is
engaged in a variety of activities to achieve these ends, this paper focuses on
the development of a second generation implementation of its most popular
tool, Recogito (Simon et al., 2015). Recogito is a semantic annotation system
(Andrews et al., 2012) with similarities in some regards to platforms such as
Pundit (Grassi et al., 2012) and Hypothesis (Hypothesis, 2017), but with
particular focus on geographic content, and accessibility to humanists without
high levels of technical literacy.

Recogito’s origins lie in the earlier Pelagios 3 project cycle dedicated to the
semantic annotation of early

geographic documents so as to provide a ‘critical mass’ of content to which
other historical materials could be related. The intended goal was to identify
place references, and their referents, in as many pre-1500 geographic documents
as possible. Such documents, or more specifically their digital surrogates,
could take a wide variety of different formats, but are typically represented
as texts, images and tables. While the first phases of Pelagios saw annotation
carried out by a community of resource curators, much - though not all - of the
annotation for Pelagios 3 was conducted within the Investigative Team. As most
of the documents to be annotated had no formal structure, it was necessary to
develop a tool which allowed us to rapidly produce annotation records
(recording a reference, a global gazetteer entry and an annotator). The result
was Recogito, a web-based platform which allowed its users to upload digital
surrogates and produce annotations pointing back to the original digital
version of an online document.

The first version of Recogito offered multiple interfaces for the discrete
tasks of: identifying place references (whether in text, image or table);
transcribing them where necessary; relating them to an entry in one of multiple
possible gazetteers (depending on the period of the document in question).
Semi-automated processes based on Natural Language Processing and Named Entity
Extraction techniques allowed the software to accelerate these tasks, while
ultimately requiring all annotations to be verified by a human individual.
Semantic interpretation is always under-determined by a text or symbol, and
thus human intervention remains a fundamental principle of the
Pelagios methodology. While document surrogates were kept behind a log-in
interface to prevent the possibility of copyright infringement, the annotations
themselves were made publicly available in real time under a CC0 (public domain
license).

Pelagios 3 and Recogito successfully met their aims and have drawn interest
from potential stakeholders working throughout the humanities. These range
not only across different periods and geographic regions, but between
disciplinary fields (such as archaeology, classics and history), in diverse
forms of text, and for the production and alignment of gazetteers to
boot. Thanks to an Open Knowledge Foundation/DM2E Open Humanities Award,
Recogito was also tested with several undergraduate student classes. This
not only allowed us to refine its user interface, but also to see the various
ways it changed students’ approaches to, and understanding of, the material
they were annotating. The very process of annotation, as many digital humanists
can attest, forces a level of systematic reflection upon the annotator which
might otherwise be elided.

Despite - indeed because of - Recogito’s success, a number of limitations came
to light during the course of Pelagios 3. First and foremost was its
centralised architecture which provided a single workspace for all users. While
well suited to a small team in regular communication with one another, the
increasing number of users and documents meant that managing document metadata,
preventing errors caused by concurrent edits, and keeping users abreast of
changes to documents of interest became increasingly difficult. Furthermore,
administrative tasks like uploading documents could only be carried out
centrally, creating unnecessary barriers to use. Above all, while document
copyright was protected through a restriction on public access, it was clear
that if the system user base continued to grow over time, then the risk of
copyright abuse would grow with it.

In addition to this central issue were a considerable number of feature
requests which were not in the project's original scope of works and which we
were unable to introduce within the time available. These include support for
various input and output formats (including TEI XML, KML, and GeoJSON); the
ability to add non-semantically defined commentary; overlapping annotations;
simple points for identifying symbols on images (rather than textboxes for
toponyms); competing interpretations of place references; and the ability to
make annotated documents publicly available where copyright permits. With
renewed financial support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Pelagios
initiative has been able to redesign and implement Recogito from the ground up
in order to address these deficiencies and introduce additional features
as well.

Recogito 2 presents an entirely new interface for the semantic annotation of
place references. Users can self-register and are now provided with their
own workspace (with an initial storage allowance of 200MB) in which they can
upload and annotate documents. Each user's cataloguing page has its own URL and
is publicly visible, although any uploaded documents are not. Documents can be
uploaded singly or as a batch of related files (such as images of pages within
a manuscript). Documents are automatically pre-parsed for possible place
references at the upload stage unless the user declines to do so.
Currently, Recogito 2 makes use of the Stanford NLP Toolkit (Manning et al.,
2014), but we intend to make it extensible so as to support alternative parsing
engines, such as the Classical Language Toolkit (Johnson et al. 201417) which
may be better suited to specific languages or use cases. Whereas Recogito 1
only supported plain text documents and image files, Recogito 2 also supports
TEI XML and images held in IIIF-compliant repositories, as well as JPEG, TIFF
and PNG.

Once uploaded, an ‘annotation view', allows the user to confirm automatically
identified place references or create new ones (Figure 1). This takes place by
means of a pop-up dialog box which determines the type of annotation (currently
only places references, with free-text commentary and tags, but future
development will include additional support for person references and events).
Assuming the reference is to a place, the system proposes a probable gazetteer
candidate which can either be confirmed or corrected as appropriate. Where the
same place definition has been aligned across multiple gazetteers, these will
be merged into a single entity for consideration, but the user is able to
select which gazetteer they wish to formally associate the reference to.

[570-1]

Fig. 1. Recogito 2 text annotation view.

A major development in Recogito 2 is the introduction of ‘social tools' for
collaborative annotation. Annotators can share their documents with other
registered users, allowing them to view, edit and create annotations dependent
on the permission settings. Edits effectively act as discussion threads so that
the full history of changes and commentary can be seen for each annotation (and
where necessary, rolled back by the owner). We are also aware that for many
users, producing Linked Open Data is not their primary objective. There are
many other benefits to be derived from annotating place references, not least
of which is the ability to map content. Recogito 2 offers a simple mapping
interface that shows the distribution of place references - where coordinates
can be derived from a gazetteer - against a range of possible backing
maps. Symbol size reflects the number of references to the place, and selecting
one provides the user with the specific references within the text itself
(Figure 2).

[570-2]

Fig. 2. Recogito 2 map view.


Manning, C. D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J.,

Bethard, S. J., McClosky, D. (2014) “The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language
Processing Toolkit.” In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 55-60.

Pelagios Commons. 2017. http://commons.pelagios.org

Simon, R., Barker, E., Isaksen, L., and de Soto Cañamares, P. (2015) “Linking
Early Geospatial Documents, One Place at a Time: Annotation of Geographic
Documents

with Recogito.” In e-Perimetron. 10(2): 49-59. ISSN.

A series of additional features replicate popular functions within Recogito 1.
This includes a statistics dashboard, which provides data about both documents
(such as place reference frequency, or the proportion of references lacking
identification) and places (such as the toponyms by which they are referred
to, and tags associated with them). It is our intention to add ‘social
statistics' that may allow people to see which of their documents are proving
most popular or perhaps to help identify other users with similar interests. We
have also extended the annotation download formats from solely CSV and RDF, to
include KML, TEI and GeoJSON. This allows for their incorporation within a much
wider range of software commonly used by humanists.

Already in public Beta-testing, Recogito 2 offers a next generation approach to
semantic annotation of humanities documents with specific emphasis on place
references. Nevertheless, we believe strongly that the value of this
contribution lies not simply in its technical innovation but in facilitating
community contributions to the Web of Linked Open Data.

