New potentials in the digital archives: a participative inquiry into
interdisciplinary collaboration in digital historical research at the Wellcome
Trust

Alex Green

a.green@wellcome.ac.uk

Wellcome Trust, United Kingdom

Lalita Kapish

l.kaplish@wellcome.ac.uk

Wellcome Trust, United Kingdom

Hannah Walker

h.walker@wellcome.ac.uk

Wellcome Trust, United Kingdom

This paper discusses an exploratory project where a group of university
academics, software developers, designers and librarians spent a week analysing
a broad selection of the Wellcome Library's digital collections with an aim to
explore new ways of conducting collaborative digital history research,
identifying and documenting barriers and successes and also pointing to gaps in
institutional support infrastructures.

Over the past two decades, significant quantities of cultural heritage have
been digitised. Internet Archive has digitised over 20 million items in
partnership with libraries and collections around the world. Google
has digitised over 25 million books as Google Books. Alongside this the
emergent field of digital humanities has sought to take advantage of new
opportunities afforded by unprecedented access to collections. Numerous
commentators and researchers have, in the words of Hayles (2015), voiced the
opinion that “if there is an area of general agreement, it is the
transformative potential of digital humanities for the humanities and for
academic discourse” (see also Ogilvie, 2016; Alves, 2014).

Wellcome Library, part of the Wellcome Trust, is one of the world's most
significant collections relating to health and medicine, with works ranging
from posters and paintings to personal archives, printed books and packaging
ephemera. Through its digitisation programmes, Wellcome is a major producer of
digitised historical material and datasets, with over 40,000 digitised
archives, nearly 100,000 digitised monographs and over 10,000 artworks,
manuscripts, videos and reports. These have been made freely available
under the most liberal licence possible, dependent on the copyright status of
the material. In addition, IIIF image services (IIIF Consortium) including
standardised image and presentation APIs, along with services for OCR and text
search are provided (Chaplin, 2016).

A key aim for Wellcome is to enable new types of research and knowledge
production; our mission is ‘to improve health for everyone by helping great
ideas to thrive' (Wellcome Trust, 2016). One way we seek to do this is through
enabling the exploration of cultural and social meanings of health in the past.
Digitisation has undoubtedly increased use of our collections significantly and
developed a large international audience, with over 50% of researchers
accessing content from outside the UK. To better understand the users and usage
of our digital collections we have carried out quantitative and qualitative
research in collaboration with Prof. Pauline Leonard (Green and Andersen
2016). Our findings showed that beyond increasing access, the nature of
collection usage has not changed significantly. The majority of researchers
still access works within a single collection, page through digitised works in
a linear fashion, make limited use of OCR search and little to no use of APIs.
We are not yet seeing Hayle's “transformative potential” (2015) realised. To
better understand this, we developed a number of hypotheses and research
questions, which we categorise here under four loose umbrellas:

Lean working

In summarising the findings of multiple digital historical studies, Alves has
argued that they ‘implicitly

confirm the efficiency of digital means... but also... that their application
is, often, generally associated with expensive projects requiring extensive
human resources with diverse skills' (2014). We questioned whether digital
research is necessarily expensive or requiring of extensive resource. Drawing
inspiration from commercial software development, we asked what is the Minimum
Viable Product (Leanstack, 2016); can teams achieve meaningful research
relatively inexpensively through an agile approach of iterative investigation
and identification of emergent areas of interest rather than pre-defining fixed
research questions.

Skills and knowledge

It could be argued that there is a skills or knowledge gap within traditional
historical research communities which inhibits conducting digital research.
However, we questioned if this was truly a barrier when evidence from citation
patterns shows increases in collaborative approaches to digital humanities
research (Nyhan and Williams, 2013). We questioned if extending the scope of
traditional research teams to include commercial development partners could
bring new insights and capabilities.

Crossing collections

Wellcome's digital collections include intensely heterogeneous material along
with data sourced from multiple institutions. We questioned whether there are
practical or technical barriers to break down divisions between collections and
drawing from a range of content. Hitchcock (2013) has argued that ‘the lack
of flexibility of the available digital tools [has] enabled only the effective
utilization and analysis of quantitative sources or sources easily transformed
into a quantitative format'. As many of Wellcome's collections are archival and
contain large quantities of handwritten and pictorial material, we specifically
wanted to explore the possibilities of digital for non-quantitative research,
and research which still requires ‘close reading' of sources (Van Dijk, 1985).

Quality and consistency

Areas of enquiry in this umbrella included whether our digital collection is
suitable in its scale and scope, and the quality and consistency of OCR and
collection metadata. We also questioned if we we had the right kind of web
services available and their usability for individuals with different levels of
experience.

To explore and better understand these questions

we designed an experimental approach, adapting a

concept becoming familiar to cultural institutions -the ‘hack day’ - and
extending it out into a week-long intensive R&D project, where small teams led
by a mix of independent and academic researchers would work collaboratively to
explore the Wellcome Library digital collections. Our participants included
research staff from several UK universities, librarians and
archivists, commercial designers and software developers. Through careful
screening of participants, we selected researchers with shared enthusiasm for,
but variable experience of digital historical research. This choice was
deliberate in order to focus in on barriers relating to experience, skills and
technical feasibility without confounding these variables with any reluctance
to use digital methods. However, the enthusiasm for digital methods in the
historical community is an important question and undoubtedly merits further
investigation. Research areas were open-ended, with a focus on experimentation
rather than production of finished work. However, we did agree broad areas,
including handwritten records from a private asylum, 5000 Medical Officer of
Health reports covering London from 1848-1972, 6,600 issues of the trade
journal Chemist and Druggist and the 79,000 books digitised by the UK-MHL
project (Wellcome Library, 2016).

Drawing from approaches of participative and cooperative inquiry (Reason and
Bradbury, 2008) we embedded Wellcome staff in mixed teams of academic staff,
developers and designers, positioning the teams as researchers of the
collections, participants in a broader experiment of research production and
observers and documenters of the experiment itself. We encouraged
self-documentation by teams through use of project boards, blogs and wikis,
conducted individual interviews with participants throughout the process and
held daily reviews and a plenary session to discuss progress and reflect on the
experiment.

During the week we produced multiple tools and visualisations, and also
historical findings. These are documented on the project blog, along with the
processes each team went through. This clearly demonstrated the potential of
the collections, but also the barriers to working with them. Interestingly, the
project using digitised archival material without OCR was one of the most
successful - partly due to the synergy of the team members, but also the
clarity of the challenge for the material. Two of the five projects seeded in
the week continue to be developed, and we are continuing to provide support to
the researchers leading them.

Feedback from participants in the project identified particularly the benefits
of working in teams with mixed skillsets. Developers and library staff
gained from acquiring greater understanding of research processes and
interests, while researchers gained access to technical skills, and exposure to
a different approach to digital working. One participant remarked: ‘I found
working with other people, from a variety of different backgrounds, really
generative - both for thinking about why people who do different kinds of work
approach digital resources in different ways, and for thinking about my own
research along new lines.’

The web services we provide for programmatic access to digital collections were
identified as a particular barrier during the week. While the images and
bibliographic metadata for our collections are exposed through an international
standard, the Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF), this proved
conceptually complex for developers to quickly prototype with, requiring
combining and processing multiple JSON responses to access digital items.
Adding further complexity to this, our collection OCR is available
primarily through ALTO XML (Library of Congress, 2016) which our developers
found challenging to process at scale.

As cultural heritage institution and a research funder, we are continuing to
unpack the implications of the findings. As a library, we found great value in
coproduction with research users so will be repeating a similar annual event,
investigating different aspects of our collections. We have also identified
particular issues related to the usability of our collections and added these
to our development roadmap. As a funder we are considering options for
increasing innovation by seeding early stage research through similar
collaborative processes. To take this forward we will be running a series of
pilot events through our interdisciplinary research residency, The Hub.

