Reading the Norton Anthologies: Databases, Canons, and “Careers”

Erik Fredner

fredner@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

David McClure

dclure@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

JD Porter

jdporter@stanford.edu

Stanford University, United States of America

What type of canon do the Norton anthologies of literature construct? And how
has that canon changed over time? These questions are somewhat unusual
for humanists in that their answers could be framed not in a syllogism or
thesis, but rather in the forms of the list and the table—and extensive ones at
that.

We wanted, first, a way to see who goes in and who goes out of this canon that
we so often teach from. In a sense, this project is as much about pedagogy as
it is about literary criticism: We have no investment in the Nortons as being
representative of “The Canon,” but rather see them as a medium through which
undergraduate and graduate students of literature encounter major works and
begin to formulate their ideas about the literary field. Following John
Guillory, the Nortons seem to be one of the primary means by which the cultural
capital of literature gets distributed and reinscribed within the university.
How, then, has this medium—of texts and canons that inform courses, students,
and scholars—changed along with literary criticism over the past half-century?

Our team built a database containing every work and excerpt featured in the
Norton Anthologies that we have studied so far, with room to grow for
those that remain. This allows us to easily see what we have been thinking of
as the “careers” of both authors and individual works over time. How, for
instance, have the works selected to represent Milton changed over time? When
was Margaret Atwood first added to any Norton Anthology? Which poems represent
Langston

Hughes in the Anthology of Poetry? Are they different from those that represent
him in the anthologies of World, American, or African-American literature? What
proportion of authors in the anthologies are women, and how has that changed
over the last fifty years? Which authors have been cut from the anthologies?
And which authors or works replaced them?

In order to answer these questions about the people and ideas admitted to these
canons, we needed to restructure the data from the Nortons' tables of contents
into a format that could be queried and would reveal the relationships among
many different works and selections from works across a variety of
different manifestations. The problems this poses from the perspective of data
structure are easiest to think through with a major author like Shakespeare,
who appears in every anthology relevant to his work. We need to know which
works were selected to represent Shakespeare in each edition of every anthology
in which his works appear. For example, which Shakespeare plays appeared in the
first edition of the Norton Anthology of English Literature, and which in next
eight? How do those selections compare to the ways in which Shakespeare is
represented in the anthologies of Drama, Poetry, Western, and World literature,
across each of their individual editions?

We achieved this by creating a structure based on a set of n-deep parent-child
relationships and a number of many-to-many connections, using a web interface
for parallel data entry and validation between several collaborators
simultaneously. Using this structure and the Shakespeare example above, King
Lear becomes a “child” of Shakespeare, and Lear's “Blow,

winds ... !” speech from Act III a child of King Lear. Because of this nesting,
we can then measure not only

which anthologies any work of Shakespeare's appears in, but, of those, which
contain King Lear in full, which only have the excerpt of Lear's speech, and
which contain other parts of Lear. This allows us to be more precise about the
ways in which we count authors' presence and absence across all of the
anthologies that this project will eventually consider. This data entry
interface was built with the Django, an open-source web application framework,
and the code is publicly accessible on GitHub. The database will be
demonstrated and described in more detail during the presentation.

Having produced new editions and types of anthologies semi-regularly for more
than fifty years, W.W. Norton & Company has been in the business of
binding literary canons longer than anyone else still publishing. Since M.H.
Abrams edited the first Norton Anthology of English Literature in 1964,
numerous editions and kinds of anthologies have followed: The Norton Anthology
of American Literature, World Literature, Western Literature, Poetry, Drama, 
Theory and Criticism, Short Fiction, Literature by Women, African American
Literature, Latino Literature, Jewish American Literature, etc.

Much can be learned about the ways in which the Nortons were designed from
these titles alone. First, the largest anthologies are defined by both
geography and a linear temporality influenced by conventions of periodization. 
The Norton Anthology of World Literature lays claim to it all, from Afghanistan
to Zimbabwe, and from Gilgamesh to Orhan Pamuk. Western Literature claims a
smaller (if vaguer) part of the world, and English and American literature
focus on national literatures, including postcolonial and expatriate
writers within the bounds of the nation-concept. While these geographic
anthologies are ostensibly genre-agnostic, others are genre-specific (Poetry, 
Drama, Short Fiction). And the last type focuses on writing by and
about writers of a specific gender (By Women), ethnicity (Latino), or religion
(Jewish).

One of the premises we read as implicit in the Norton's design, then, is that
some authors and works become significant enough to include only in specific
contexts. Making it into the World Literature anthology seems to denote
significance at a greater level than inclusion in the Western Literature
anthology alone would. Likewise, seeing a writer anthologized in Short Fiction
but not World Literature seems to imply a significance limited to that literary
form. Canon formation has always relied on a logic of a ranking or tiering, and
the pool of authors and texts against which a given work “competes” is greatest
at the largest scale of population. We argue that the geographically
bound Nortons can be read in such a way that they imply a hierarchy even among
the canons the anthologies already connote.

Of course, all of the decisions we measure across these many tables of contents
are underwritten by a human element. Many practical and historical factors that
exist at a slant to the question of a work's “canon-icity” attend the
production of an anthology that stretches to more than 6,000 pages, serves tens
of thousands of instructors and students, and our analysis attempts to account
for these factors. A quantitative approach is necessary but not sufficient to
read the ways in which the Nortons have represented and continue to represent
works that, taken together, lay claim to the status of a national, generic, or
global literature. Two key examples of the incommensurability of the form to
its implicit claims: Because of its length, the novel is poorly served by the
anthology form. Some shorter novels and novellas do get anthologized. But, more
often than not, writers who are primarily known as novelists are represented by
a single short story, or an excerpt from a novel. The second overarching
practicality is the influence of authorial estates and the cost of printing
rights, especially for 20th and 21st century authors.

As a way of approaching these institutional and qualitative questions, we have
begun a set of interviews with Martin Puchner, the current general editor of
the World and Western anthologies, and will discuss some of his insights into
the decision-making process in the presentation. Among these include the
influence of instructor and student surveys on texts that get selected, the
impact of rights costs on the texts that get chosen for a given author, and the
place of editorial intervention in relation to these powerful practicalities.

Our database and the attendant institutional research on the Nortons as the
product of both scholarly editing and the demands of the market allow us to
see the trajectories not only of individual authors and works, but broader
trends of inclusion and exclusion in the Norton's canon. By gathering data
about both the works and the authors who wrote them, we reveal the ways in
which the Norton has responded to the expansion of the literary canon, growing
in size while simultaneously giving a greater share of its pages to authors and
ideas that would not have been considered canonical 1962. In the process, we
find authors whose literary reputation has waxed or waned (or both); those
whose names have been a constant presence, but whose representative works have
dramatically changed; those who were slated for canonization but never “made
it;” and those who have arrived late but seem to be here to stay.

Like many of the Stanford Literary Lab's projects, “Reading Norton Anthologies”
operates at several scales at once. We are interested both in individual texts
and authors, as well as broader patterns of representation and
contextualization within the confines of this object that occupies liminal
spaces between statement and syllabus, and between the market and the canon.

