Archaeologies of Reading: Modeling and Recreating the Annotation Practices
of Gabriel Harvey, John Dee, Jacques Derrida, and the Winthrop Family

Jean Bauer

jabauer@princeton.edu

Princeton University, United States of America

Earle Havens

ehavens2@jhu.edu

Johns Hopkins University, United States of America

Matthew Symonds

m.symonds@ucl.ac.uk

University College London, United Kingdom

Anthony Grafton

grafton@exchange.princeton.edu

Princeton University, United States of America

Jennifer Rampling

rampling@exchange.princeton.edu

Princeton University, United States of America

Katie Chenoweth

kac3@exchange.princeton.edu

Princeton University, United States of America

Christian Flow

cflow@exchange.princeton.edu

Princeton University, United States of America

This panel brings together three projects that explore and analyze annotated
texts in digital environments: The Archeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe
, The Winthrop Family on the Page, and Derrida’s

Margins: . All three projects seek to give users the experience of how another
person read their books (see Notes). While each is fascinating in its own
right, collectively these projects span centuries and provide a powerful and
instructive lens on data modeling, interinstitutional collaboration, and
interoperability.

The connections between these projects, both on a scholarly and an
institutional level provide a powerful case study in creating distinct but
interoperable digital humanities projects and resources. Both Winthrop and
Derrida’s Margins are being built in the Center for Digital Humanities at
Princeton University, while AOR is a collaboration between Johns Hopkins,
University College London, and Princeton. AOR and the Winthrop project share a
co-PI, Anthony Grafton, and two books owned and heavily annotated by John Dee
are in the Winthrop library and thus came to New England. However, while the
AOR project looks at a single renaissance annotator (Gabriel Harvey in Phase I-
the project is heavily indebted to the methods and questions outlined in
Jardine and Grafton, 1990-, and John Dee in Phase II), the Winthrop project
looks at generators of annotators (men and women) making it as much a
prosopographical project as a study of annotation. Like AOR, Derrida’s Margins
focuses on a single scholar’s interaction with his library, but Jacques
Derrida’s annotation practices differ dramatically from Harvey or Dee, and
French copyright law poses serious challenges to representing the book pages
online.

All three projects make use of the International Image Interoperability
Framework (http://iiif.io/), but differ on the rest of their underlying data
structures. AOR uses a custom XML schema to encode a critical edition of the
annotations. Winthrop will use a custom prosopographical-bibliographical
relational database, implemented in Django. While most of these relationships
will be attested through annotation, the system will also record other
connections (including purchasing records, books referenced in letters, etc).
The annotation data model will most likely be created using a graph database,
given the multiple types of annotations and the ways they can be expressed.
Derrida’s Margins will be another custom relational database, built in Django,
but will be fully bi-lingual, allowing users to search and browse in English
and French. The Winthrop and Derrida database will also be exposed as Linked
Open Data.

All three projects are committed to interoperability, with a key goal being the
ability to search across the three projects once they are complete. The
projects are in close contact the IIIF Editors and the W3C Web Annotation
Working Group to ensure adherence to and input on best practices and emerging
standards.

The Archaeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe

Earle Havens, Matthew Symonds,

Anthony Grafton

The Archaeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe (AOR), is an international
collaboration among the Sheridan Libraries at Johns Hopkins University, the
Centre for Editing Lives and Letters (CELL) at UCL, and the Center for Digital
Humanities at Princeton University Library, with funding from the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundation. It is also an interdisciplinary collaboration between
historians, librarians, software engineers and data scientists.

While the body of scholarship on the history of early modern reading practices
has burgeoned during the past several decades—guided in large part by
the initial scholarly work of our project partners, the late Professor Lisa
Jardine and Professor Anthony Grafton—as a collective body of knowledge the
history of reading has nonetheless remained limited to isolated, partial, and
impressionistic studies of single texts read by single annotators.

As researchers, we conduct this work in the conspicuous absence of comparative
evidence of the larger range of early modern historical reading practices,
strategies, and agendas. Scholars also find it physically impossible to
effectively penetrate the dynamic array of information preserved in
annotated books for the purpose of systematic analysis owing to their sheer
density of content, in many instances, relative to the original texts on which
the annotations comment.

During the original planning workshop on annotated books that led to the
formation of the project, leading scholars, librarians, curators, and
technologists agreed collectively that these constraints imposed upon the study
of early modern annotated texts in their original analog form could only be
overcome satisfactorily when annotations are treated as data sets that can be
mined and analyzed effectively in more versatile, enriched, and readily
searchable digital forms.

The AOR team has elected to focus on a distinct and roughly contemporary dyad
of clearly identified early modern readers: Gabriel Harvey in Phase 1
(20142016) and John Dee in Phase 2 (2016-2018). While the identities of a large
majority of early modern annotators remains unknown in extant collections, this
focus on known readers will enable the project team to analyze and more
precisely situate the processes of reading and annotation within their
respective historical contexts.

In order to make these sources more accessible to analysis, the AOR technology
team - based at Johns Hopkins University's Digital Research and Curation

Center - is working closely with the International Image Interoperability
Framework (IIIF) protocol and community to develop features and use cases that
will enhance AOR within this larger framework.

IIIF features a set of protocols, application programming interfaces (APIs),
and shared technologies for the presentation of web-based images. In the
case of AOR, these images are digital surrogates of rare book materials
containing manuscript annotations by Gabriel Harvey and John Dee, which users
interface through AOR's adapted version of the Mirador (version 2.0) viewer.
The technical infrastructure for AOR includes a data archive, an image server,
a IIIF image service, a corresponding IIIF presentation service, and the
IIIF-compliant Mirador viewer.

The data archive for this project provides the framework for long-term access
to, and preservation of, all project content: an important contribution
to Digital Humanities more generally, insofar as this issue has not yet been
unaddressed within IIIF. The technology team has defined an archival data
model that can be mapped to other data models for data access and presentation
over time. Another layer of the infrastructure that has been developed in Phase
1 of AOR consists of an image server that accesses content from within the data
archive. Currently, the team is utilizing a commercial FSI image server, though
comparable image server resources (e.g. djatoka) may also be used.

While AOR has been deployed using the versatile Mirador 2.0 API, the AOR
technology team has developed IIIF endpoints for any available image
service and presentation service, so long as they can be accessed by an
IIIF-compliant image viewer. All AOR data can be accessed through our Mirador2
IIIF-com-plaint viewer, which has been specifically enhanced to meet the use
requirements identified by the team for both current and future users. Over the
course of AOR Phase 1, the technology and scholarly teams have worked together
closely to define and implement a set of use cases related to image viewing and
manipulation, transcription viewing, and dynamic, query-building search
capabilities.

The current AOR viewer is the culmination of this iterative development
process, which presents users with a wide-ranging set of functionalities aimed
at enabling new forms of research on the history of reading practices. One new
method is informed by the use of insights gleaned from the data generated
throughout Phase 1 to formulate new research questions for the humanities team
to investigate.

By creating a corpus of important and representative annotated texts with
searchable transcriptions and translations, we can begin to compare and
fully analyze early modern reading, and place that mass of research material
within a broader historical context. In so doing, we could also approach—not in
isolation but as a dynamic, internally and institutionally complimentary,
research team—the traditionally subjective study of reading in a demonstrably
empirical, comparative, and systematic way.

All visible interventions by readers in the books -marginal notes, underlining,
marks and symbols, et cetera - have been marked up according to a non-TEI XML
schema developed by humanities and technology teams working in close
cooperation. The Phase 1 corpus of thirteen books owned and annotated by
Gabriel Harvey has generated 3,355 XML files, each representing a single page
of an annotated book. The data contained within these XML files has allowed us
to map the language Harvey used in his own annotations and highlighted in the
original printed texts, to find interesting correlations, and to use those
correlations to form new investigations into the history of reading, Harvey's
own biography, and the wider history of ideas in the early modern period.

Derrida's Margins: Annotations from the Personal Library of Jacques Derrida

Katie Chenoweth

This paper will give an overview of Phase One of the Derrida's Margins project
currently underway at the Center for Digital Humanities at Princeton University
(CDH).

Derrida's Margins is a longterm project that aims to create a website and
online research tool for annotations from the Library of Jacques Derrida, an
archival collection housed at Princeton University Library's Rare Books and
Special Collections that was first opened to the public in March 2016. Phase
One of Derrida's Margins focuses on annotations related to Derrida's landmark
1967 work De la grammatologie, first translated into English in 1976 as Of
Grammatol-ogy (hereafter OG, see Spivak's 2016 translation. This corpus will
serve as a pilot data set for future work, allowing us to establish protocols,
workflow, and a relational database model.

Jacques Derrida is one of the major figures of twentieth-century thought, and
his personal library represents a major intellectual archive. The Derrida
Library, consisting of about 19,000 published books and other materials,
represents a lifetime of reading. But for Derrida, the act of reading was not a
passive process: he engaged — even grappled — with what he read, covering pages
with notes and cross-references, inserting other handwritten materials, quoting
and adapting what he read into what he wrote. As Derrida himself said in an
interview later in his life, his books bear "traces of the violence of pencil
strokes, exclamation points, arrows and underlining” (for details related to
Princeton's acquisition of the Derrida Library, see the article posted by
Princeton University Libraries, 2015).

It was in OG that Derrida first articulated a new style of critical reading,
which would become the foundation of the philosophy of “deconstruction.”
Our online research tool will enable scholars to study the development of this
philosophy in an unprecedented way by providing comprehensive digital access to
the material annotations, marginalia, bookmarks, and other notes from Derrida's
library that correspond to each quotation and citation in OG. Beyond
making Derrida's annotations available digitally for the first time, this
project seeks to enable researchers to understand the relationship between
Derrida's published writing and his reading practices. As we move beyond OG in
future phases, the website will also allow researchers to gain new insights
into Derrida's library and his published writing as networks of texts,
citations, and annotations.

OG was chosen as the pilot text not only because it is a foundational text for
deconstructive reading, but for two additional reasons: 1) it is among the
most widely read of Derrida’s works and, according to Google Scholar, by far
the most frequently cited, constituting more than 10% of the total citations
for Derrida as of November 1, 2016; 2) 2017 will mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the initial publication OG, and a number of scholarly conferences and events
are scheduled to discuss the text and its legacy.

In Phase One, we began by identifying all instances of citation (quotations,
references, footnotes, etc.) in OG that lead us back to books and other reading
materials from Derrida’s library. Each cited work from OG is entered into a
Zotero library, which will eventually form the basis of a public bibliography
for OG. We then located these references in Derrida’s copy (or, often, multiple
copies—different editions, translations, etc.) of each work. Each instance of
citation is given a tag in the Zotero library that indicates the source page
from OG, the type of citation, the page number(s) in the cited text, whether or
not the volume is present in Derrida’s Library at Princeton, and the presence
or absence of annotation (here construed as a mark of any kind, verbal or
non-verbal). Next, we will transcribe all marginal annotations and other
markings, limiting ourselves to tagged pages, i.e., those that are explicitly
referenced by Derrida in OG. Digital images and transcriptions of these
annotated pages will form the basis of the website, allowing users to go
“behind the scenes” of Derrida's reading practices.

Given that Derrida's work is widely read in the United States, France, and
around the world by scholars from numerous disciplines in the humanities
and social sciences, we anticipate that the audience for this project will be
broad and international. The more targeted audience would be specialists of
Derrida and deconstruction, as well as researchers in philosophy, literary
studies, and intellectual history.

One major risk this project faces is the question of French copyright
restrictions. Due to the fact that the majority of books owned by Jacques
Derrida are copyrighted works whose copyright is still in force, there is a
question regarding the legality of posting digital images of sections of those
books on our website. Despite the fact that the copies of these works in JD's
library have been annotated by the philosopher's hand, the works themselves are
the intellectual property of their respective publishing houses in France.
Pending clarification by the Office of the University Counsel regarding the
amount of risk we are at liberty to take in this respect, we will make a
decision as to the amount of text from those works that it is acceptable for us
to display on our public website.

This project is intended as the first phase in a longterm project. Team members
in Phase One will create a manual detailing their work process and workflow to
facilitate and standardize the project going forward. At the end of our pilot
phase with the CDH, we will have the following

The main outcomes and deliverables of this project are the following:

•    Bibliography of De la grammatologie, made available as public Zotero
library

•    Digitization of all relevant pages from the Derrida library

•    Customized grayed-out images, if necessary

•    Annotations transcribed, translated, and tagged

•    Custom designed relational database to record and analyze Derrida's
annotation practices and the anchor text they reference

•    Bi-lingual (French and English) Web portal created in Django to allow
users to search and browse the annotations

•    Transcriber's manual

The Winthrop Family on the Page

Anthony Grafton, Jennifer Rampling, Christian Flow

“The Winthrop Family on the Page” will employ an extensive database of
bibliographic information, biographical data, and marginal annotations to allow
digital exploration of early modern lives and learned practices. Centering on
the surviving library holdings of the storied Winthrop family, whose
representatives included such prominent figures as John Winthrop, a founder and
governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony, the final product will be a web
platform affording a dynamic sense of how colonial readers interacted with
texts and fellow readers. Users will be encouraged to follow the story along
multiple axes, both dia-chronically—as family members communicated across
decades, even centuries, in the margins of their shared books—and
synchronically, as single readers followed references from one text to the
other, leaving a bread-crumb trail of notation along the way. The experience
will be further enriched by inclusion of information on how the Winthrops'
books surface in other historical sources they left us, including journals
and correspondence, ensuring once again vivid access not just to the texts, but
to the people who read them.

The bulk of the project's database will consist in entries for some 300 books
formerly owned by the Winthrops and currently held at the New York Society
Library. Aside from bibliographical information for all of these books, the
database will include a second module treating the marginalia they reveal.
Here, the project will log the location of all manuscript notes in
the collection; in addition, for a select, smaller subset of 50-60 books,
high-quality digital images will allow users to view the marginal material
directly. Several representative notes from the same sub-set will be translated
and transcribed along with relevant anchor text, and all of the collected data
will be encoded for search. Users will be able to come to the collection with
queries about everything from annotations of a particular era, to those of a
particular person, to those presenting a specific sign (e.g., the manicule) or
handling a specific theme.

The defining characteristic of the project is its deft exhibition of a very
particular source-base. The rich surviving Winthrop holdings, coupled with the
opportunities for collection and display afforded by a digital platform, offer
a rare opportunity to excavate and reassemble an Early Modern book collection,
giving a concrete frame to the “intellectual space” within which the family
lived and thought. Still more exciting is the chance to fill that space with
dialogue: the project's careful curation, transcription, and (when necessary)
 translation of the marginalia that the Winthrops recorded as they read allows
users to follow their intellectual journey between books and between
generations. Those generations spanned not just time but space: because the
Winthrops were a colonial family, their New England library had its roots and
its first readers in Europe. Users of the collection are therefore positioned
to pose and answer questions about how Early Modern knowledge made the
transition from the Old to the New World. How, we wonder, might our
understanding of the Salem Witch Trials be affected when we take into account
the fact that Wait Still Winthrop, the Chief Magistrate of Massachusetts,
could well have perused the marginal annotations of his European ancestor, Adam
Winthrop, in the witchcraft section of the family library? How did reading and
annotation practices originally cultivated in England filter into the learned
arsenal of later colonial readers?

Queries like these are made actionable by the labors of a highly-skilled team:
specialties in book history and annotation, in ecclesiastical history, in
alchemical practice, and in the classical tradition will be amply represented.
The project itself, which will offer direct access to an array of understudied
material, is meant to have wide interdisciplinary appeal. Situated at the nexus
of digital humanities and history of the book, straddling Europe and the
colonies, the domains of intellectual history and learned practice, it will
resonate with historians of Europe, America, and the Atlantic World; book
historians; librarians; historians of science, medicine, and religion; and
users outside the Academy. And in future years the appeal will only grow more
broad-based, for project members hope to build outward from the corpus on which
the 2016-17 work is founded. The more material at hand, the richer the web of
connections users will be able to make between books and readers. There are
several possible modes of expansion: (1) full imaging, transcription and
translation of all books in the NYSL corpus (that is, including those beyond
the subset currently targeted for the pilot-phase of the project); (2)
inclusion of further Winthrop books housed at other major repositories,
including items from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (when the
Winthrops added hundreds of new books to the library, including a collection of
almanacs now housed at the Houghton Library, and the bulk of the collection of
Winthrop books at Allegheny College); (3) development into a broader study of
Colonial reading practices and knowledge networks, involving other family
collections of annotated books, such as the Mather Family Library, now held at
the American Antiquarian Society; the library of Thomas Prince, now at the
Boston Public Library; and the library of James Logan, now at the
Library Company of Philadelphia.

Notes

1. There are a number of projects dedicated to recording annotations or
marginalia, notably the

crowd sourced Annotated Books Online and Book Traces. The three projects
discussed in this panel proposal differ in that they are specifically grouped
by annotator and want to answer specific questions about the worldview and read
patterns of known annotators. They are also designed to facilitate more
complex queries. These projects are also addressing a different question from
other annotation projects such as Annotation Studio which are designed for
modern readers to annotate digital texts.

