Contextual interpretation of digital music notation

Kevin Page

kevin.page@oerc.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

David Lewis

david.lewis@oerc.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

David Weigl

david.weigl@oerc.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Research Objects and scholarship in the digital age

As scientific research practice has grown to include ever greater quantities of
data, larger collaborations, and distributed methods, Research Objects
(Bechhofer et al, 2013) have been introduced as a means to gather together the
context surrounding an investigation and to support its future validation,
understanding, and reuse. In many cases these Research Objects build upon the
methods, output, and provenance already captured and encoded by workflow
systems -- the digital environments in which the science is conducted.

More recently there have been proposals for the use of Research Objects within
the digital humanities and musicology (Dreyfus and Rindfleisch 2014; De Roure
et al. 2016). Digital editions and annotations of digitally encoded works can
be viewed as manifestations of workflows deployed in musicological scholarship,
raising the question of how e.g. editorial annotations in a digital score
should reference other digital items within the Research Object and vice versa.

For example, a study of the Mariinsky Opera's rendition of Wagner's Ring cycle
in November 2014 produced a multimedia dataset including audio, annotations
made by a musicologist on a short score before the performance (annotations
which could be identified a priori from the score such as dynamics, appearances
of a leitmotif, etc.), further annotations captured digitally by the
musicologist during the live performance (typically staging and interpretive
commentary), and free-form text from a digital pen (Page et al.

2016). If the score in use had been a digital edition encoded in MEI (the
XML-based Music Encoding Initiative. as reviewed by Crawford and Lewis 2016)
how might we reference the musicologist's annotations? Or the other media
objects captured and the metadata describing them; existing Linked Data
references to Wagner and leitmotifs; and to earlier surveys and studies made by
the musicologist on leitmotif interpretation? Linked notation in support of
musicology

Notation examples are a vital part of analytical essays in musicology, helping
to illustrate analytical observations and justify hypotheses, arguments and
conclusions. They can be excerpts from a score, or custom-made notations which
add annotations or comments to the original notation.

Furthermore, the presentation of multiple analogous musical extracts for
comparison is often required to support a musicological narrative. 
Paradigmatic analysis, for example, involves passages of music placed one above
another such that analogous elements are directly juxtaposed, with gaps left as
necessary to ensure that vertical alignment is preserved. Stacked presentation
of different scores or different parts of the same score have been used for
well over a century, but they quickly become unwieldy and hard to interpret,
especially as the number of extracts increases. What is not available in such
paper-based approaches is the interactivity that can make complex comparisons
between many extracts practical by turning a static presentation into an
iterative exploration of digital materials.

In this paper we consider the example of a digital companion presenting the
contents of a Research Object studying the interpretation of leitmotif
examples from Wagner's compositions, specifically the Ring cycle, as they are
presented in numerous historical introductions, opera guides, leitmotivic
threads and leitmotif lists included in libretto editions and piano scores. The
study of the incidences of these particular leitmotif identifications consists
of both the gathering of source material and its digitisation and
cataloguing, and a musicological study of the potential relationships,
influence and evolution between leitmotif interpretations. To enable the
extension and repurposing of the identified leitmotif relationships they are
structured using an ontology.

Notation examples in leitmotif guides are usually abstractions drawn from a
piano score. When reporting findings from this research it is desirable to
present and relate the scholarly arguments back to the musicological context
within which they are made: from the score excerpts in the source material; and
to MEI encodings that illustrate and encode both the examples from which they
are drawn and to complete (piano) scores of the overall operas.

This enables matching and linking of the examples as they are described in the
scholarly text, via semantic hyperlinks, to and from the score, including
exact matches and variants, illustrating interpretations, and situating the
examples back in context. Encoding interpretations in the form of notation
examples as variant readings of a certain passage could thereby chart
the ‘understanding' of the work as a history of its variants.

(For example comparing: Richard Wagner, Die Walküre, piano score by Felix
Mottl, Leipzig,

Peters, 1914, p.165; Hans von Wolzogen, Thematischer Leitfaden durch die Musik
zu Richard Wagners Festspiel Der Ring des Nibelungen, 2^nd ed., Leipzig,
Schloemp, 1876, p.58, ‘Schicksalsmotiv'; Gustav Kobbe, Wagner's Music Dramas
Analyzed With the Leading Motives, New York: Schirmer, 1923, p. 57, ‘Motive of
Fate'; George Dunning Gribble, The Master Works of Richard Wagner, London,
Everett, 1913, p. 289, ‘Fate Motif'.)

Introducing MELD: Music Encoding and Linked Data

To realise the digital notation companion we have developed the MELD framework
(Music Encoding and Linked Data). MELD enables the interactive presentation of
multimedia contents of the Research Object, such as the images, text, audio,
and MEI encoded music notation described in the previous section. These can be
explored contextually alongside each other through the use of semantic links,
encoded using RDF, which describe the musicological relationships between
the resources (and elements within them). In contrast to earlier technologies
which have typically aligned resources against a timeline (e.g. in
milliseconds, or using MIDI), MELD expresses relationships anchored
to musically meaningful items scoped using MEI. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of
MELD displaying text and notation, highlighting leitmotifs as identified in
different historical guides.

[585-1]

Figure 1. MELD displaying contextualised text and music notation.

To render our music notation (encoded using MEI) we use Verovio (Pugin et al.
2013), an open-source MEI renderer that produces beautiful SVG renditions of
the score. In addition, Verovio provides an architecture in which identifiers
(in other words, anchors for our relational Linked Data expressions in the
MEI XML) are persisted through to the rendering (in SVG) which can be connected
to identifiers in our contextual information (in RDF). When rendered (and
re-rendered) for the user in our web based application interface, the browser
uses these identifiers to generate interface elements and undertake actions
that combine information from the MEI and the Linked Data.

[585-2]

Figure 2. Musicological relationships, encoded using Open Annotations, within
the Research Object (simplified).

Within the Research Object, we treat the XML IDs of elements within the MEI
resource as fragment identifiers, so URIs can be straightforwardly generated
for each notation element of interest. We employ the Web Annotation Data Model
(Sanderson et al. 2017), using these URIs as targets of annotations
representing each musicological marking. Corresponding annotation bodies are
associated with semantic tags defined to encode the different musicological
interpretations, which are in turn the annotation bodies of a
top-level annotation targeting the URI of the files currently being viewed,
including the music encoding (MEI) and scholarly interpretation (HTML). A
simplified example of such relationships is shown in Figure 2.

[585-3]

Figure 3. The MELD framework (shading corresponds to that in Figure 2).

The MELD client then uses HTML/CSS and JavaScript, served by a simple web
service implemented with Python Flask, and illustrated in Figure 3. The
procedure driving the rendering and user interaction is illustrated in Figure
1. The client processes a framed (see the explanation of framing) JSON-LD
representation of the RDF graph instantiating the data model. It then performs
an HTTP GET call to acquire the MEI resource targeted by the top-level
annotation, and renders the corresponding musical score to SVG using Verovio.
User interactions are captured using HTML divs drawn as bounding boxes over
portions of the SVG corresponding to MEI elements of interest; this
is simplified by Verovio's retention of MEI identifiers in the produced SVG
output.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council
grant AH/L006820/1 ‘Transforming Musicology', and EPSRC grant EP/L019981/1
‘Fusing Audio and Semantic Technologies for Intelligent Music Production and
Consumption'. We thank all our colleagues on these projects who have supported
and encouraged this work, particularly Carolin Rindfleisch for her
complementary work on musicological ontologies, and Laurence Dreyfus for wider
inspiration and motivation in developing these technologies.

Crawford, T., & Lewis, R. (2016). Review: Music Encoding Initiative. Journal of
the American Musicological Society, 69(1), 273-285.

De Roure, D., Klyne, G., Page, K.R., Pybus, J., Weigl, D.M., Wilcoxson, M.,
Willcox, P. (2016). Plans and Performances: Parallels in the Production of
Science and Music. Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 12th International Conference
on e-Science. IEEE, pp. 185-192.

Dreyfus, L., & Rindfleisch, C. (2014). Using Digital Libraries in the Research
of the Reception and Interpretation of Richard Wagner's Leitmotifs. Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Digital Libraries for Musicology. ACM, pp.
1-3

Page, K., Nurmikko-Fuller, T., Rindfleisch, C., Weigl, D.

(2016). Digital Annotation Tooling for Opera Performance Studies. Digital
Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical
University,

Krakow, pp. 306-309.

Pugin, L., Zitellini, R., & Roland, P. (2014). Verovio: A Library for Engraving
MEI Music Notation into SVG. Proceedings of the 15th International Society for
Music Information Retrieval Conference, pp. 107-112.

Sanderson, R., Ciccarese, P., Young, B. (2017). Web Annotation Data Model. W3C
recommendation.

