Your Own Personal Matrix: Generationally Mediated Realities and Digital
Cultures of Choice

Adrian L. Cook

adrian.cook@tccd.edu

Tarrant Country College, United States of America

The 1999 film may have been prophetic. The Matrix has us. But our children may
have the Matrix. . .under their control. And it can be personalized.

This project, now at its seed level, merges performance studies, critical media
studies and a reading of Jean Baudrillard's idea of simulations and simulacrum
to examine the dramatization of our social reality as it occurs through each
evolution of broadcast media in the twentieth century. Since the emergence of
broadcast radio, each American generation has interpreted and aesthetically
crafted a consensus reality that, with the onset of cable TV and the
internet, has become somewhat of a simulation. This project claims that
Generation Z (born after 2001) will inherit a social reality that is so highly
filtered and aesthetically shaped as to be more of an abstraction of objective
truth than narrative drama or even video games. Furthermore, the additional
mediation of algorithms designed initially for marketing purposes will provide
for Generation Z "realities of choice."

This investigation began as I observed my young daughter asserting her
perceived right to choose her digitally delivered entertainment from a
seemingly endless menu. The Gen Xers (my generation) are in charge of producing
these entertainments, while Millennials form the bulk of the writers. This is
strange alchemy, as Gen X produces both documentary and narrative drama that
critiques the mythical post-war reality created by Baby Boomers,
Millennials internalize and interpret that critique, producing infinite
variations on themes by virtue of the sheer number of digital outlets and
accessible, user friendly storytelling tools. The conceptual model
of generational mediation to be presented, shows the gradual movement away from
a relatively objective (or let us say homogenized consensus) social reality
to and a multi-cyber-verse of highly mediated realities.

The irony is that, while the beauty of this technonarrative state allows an
exponentially diversifying population space and accessibility for
disseminating their narrative and to communicate their cultural reality; the
option to personalize our input, in tandem with our twenty-first century
culture of convenience, means that we may never see and experience
nor empathize with the lives of “Others.”

This work marks a continuation of a dissertation on performing myth in virtual
realities and the foundational level of a “Generational Reality Theory,” an
examination of meaning making, knowledge acquisition and generational ways of
being as codified cultural expressions. In other words, because of our emerging
ability to perform ourselves and shape our perception of reality wholesale via
media spaces, and the likely development of digital (and other virtual)
 platforms beyond our current imagination, each subsequent generation is
living, quite literally, in a different reality to the extent that
cross-generational communication - and for professors, andragogy -
is equivalent to cross-cultural communication.

