The Psalter Project: Providing Mediated Access to Religio-Political Subjects in
Early Modern England

Nandra Perry

nandraperry@tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Bryan Paul Tarpley

bptarpley@tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Emerging from the crucible of the religious upheaval that characterizes the
English Renaissance is arguably the most influential English book ever printed
in terms of its impact on Anglophone religious, literary, popular, and legal
culture: The Book of Common Prayer (BCP). Encoded within its pages is a kind of
algorithm, an annually recurring process, a ritual-ization of both private
devotion and public worship for generations of post-Reformation English
readers. Taking our cue from Brad Pasanek (Metaphors of Mind:
An Eighteenth-Century Dictionary, 2015) and Peter Stally-brass (“Against
Thinking.” PMLA, Vol. 122, No. 5), both of whom have drawn useful analogies
between the database and the commonplace book, we employ the creative
anachronism of the “Bible app” to describe the function of the BCP in early
modern England. As the first such “app” of its kind, the BCP choreographed
religious meaning and ritualized worship for a whole generation of English
Bible readers, shaping them into religio-political subjects who were then able
to situate their lived experiences within a communally shared time and space.
From the perspective of the Early Modern layperson, the BCP provides mediated
access to the newly translated biblical text. Of course, from the abstracted
perspective of the nascent nation-state of England, the BCP functions as a way
to mitigate new anxieties surrounding the democratization of sacred scripture.
As the legally established, official means by which sacred text is encountered,
the BCP is nothing less than a masterpiece of social engineering.

To extend the metaphor of text as program, the BCP can also be thought of as a
class, one which can be inherited and sub-classed, instantiated and “hacked”
according to the agenda of particular readers who would produce, via their
nuanced reading of BCP ritual, slightly different kinds of subjects according
to the specific context in which they find themselves. Of particular interest
to the project at hand is a 1586 BCP which has been highly “sub-classed” by one
of its owners. Bound together with the prayer book is an entire psalter, whose
collection of 150 psalms is cross-referenced in a single hand, which also makes
occasional thematic/tonal annotations. In our examination of this prayer book,
we wish to develop a methodology for accessing the kind of subject such a
“re-engineered” BCP might have produced.

Implied in the very notion of access, of course, is mediation. Within the
limited scope of our project, we do not have recourse to the intense amount of
labor required to perform a rigorous exegesis of the entire psalter according
to how its 16^th-century readers might have read it. What we do have, via the
psalter's marginalia, is what one (or perhaps two) reader(s) selected as
noteworthy in their BCP-regulated practice of reading the Psalms. We also have
our own attempts to thematize and register the tone of those same texts. Given
these assets, we attempt to provide via the Psalter Project a representation of
how a subject produced by this prayer book might look from our perspective. Our
hope is that, despite the inherently mediated nature of such a representation,
we might provide students and scholars alike a better understanding of
the “programmatic” nature of religious para-texts like the BCP.

The Psalter Project was born out of Dr. Nandra Perry's scholarship in Early
Modern English literature in partnership with Bryan Tarpley's work as Lead
Software Applications Developer for the Initiative for Digital Humanities,
Media, and Culture (IDHMC) at Texas A&M University. Perry's work with the 1586
prayer book led her to apply for a Summer Technical Assistance Grant with the
IDHMC, at which point she was awarded some of Tarpley's development time.
Together, they (we) designed a relational database schema for recording the
cross-references and tags found in the 1586 prayer book, as well as a
web-interface for entering and viewing them. A beta version of the project is
available for viewing.

Before commencing development on the Psalter Project web app, a survey of
extant, web-based tools was performed to determine whether any one tool
(or collection of tools) already satisfied our requirements. Given the
marginalia we have to work with (a large amount of scriptural cross-references
and thematic

tags), we wanted a tool to facilitate the capture and

that they too might be able to provide (mediated) access to religio-political
subjects.


analysis of this data. While there are indeed several

digital annotation tools available, such as MIT’s Annotation Studio, or the
University of Virginia’s PRISM, none of these tools allow for the rapid entry
of scriptural verse range references and tags. Tarpley implemented the database
schema by creating a MySQL database and wrote the web application in Python
using the Django web framework, as well as other web-related technologies, such
as the jQuery Javascript library and the Bootstrap CSS framework. The
database and web app are both hosted by the IDHMC’s server infrastructure at
Texas A&M. As a way of beta-testing the app, Perry then recorded a sampling of
the psalter’s cross-references and tags, and also included her own tagging of
the referenced verses in terms of both thematic content and perceived emotional
impact (affect).

While the Psalter Project in still in development both in terms of methodology
and finished product, a preliminary sketch of our reader is emerging via
the various views made available through the web app. There is a visualization
of the thematic and affective tags in the form of tag-clouds weighted by
frequency, a view of the most frequently referenced verses along with their
tags, a break-down of all referenced verses (and associated tags) by any
specific thematic or affective tag, a presentation of the network of
referenced verses (and associated tags) by any specific verse, and a
presentation of any of the 150 Psalms in its entirety where referenced verses
can be hovered over, displaying tags and referenced verses. At this initial
stage, we believe that this multi-faceted portrayal is revealing a reader with
a profound sense of group identity as the loyal subject of a just God who
provides deliverance to the deserving and punishment to “bad” subjects
and oppressive outsiders. The effect, it would seem, is the sacralization of a
religio-politics in which the reader’s relationship to God is analogous to his/
her relationship to the nation-state (and vice versa), thereby justifying, in
turn, a posture of hostility toward outsiders and “bad” subjects.

With this paper, we intend to not only provide a more fully fleshed-out
representation of the Early Modern religio-political English subject, but to
interrogate the various assumptions and methodologies we use to provide this
representation so that we might improve the Psalter Project web application. We
hope to be able to provide this web application (both in terms of an open-
source repository and as an IDHMC hosted web service) to other scholars in the
future, so

