German History-Digital: A Platform for Transnational Historical Knowledge
Cocreation

Matthew Hiebert

hiebert@ghi-dc.org

German Historical Institute (Washington DC) United States of America

Simone Lässig

laessigs@ghi-dc.org

German Historical Institute (Washington DC) United States of America

Andreas Witt

andreas.witt@uni-koeln.de

University of Cologne, Germany

The German Historical Institute Washington (GHI) is in the development phase of
German History-Digital (GH-D), a transatlantic digital initiative to meet
the scholarly needs of historians and their students facing new
historiographical and technological challenges. In the proposed paper we will
discuss the research goals, methodology, prototyping, and development
strategy of GH-D as infrastructure to facilitate transnational historical
knowledge co-creation for the large community of researchers and students
already relying on digital resources of the GHI and for the growing
constituency of citizen scholars.

Despite its great progress, the digital humanities have yet to broadly impact
research in German history. The past ten years have witnessed the proliferation
of online resources relevant to the field, yet these materials largely remain
siloed in different systems, with material difficult to discover or gather by
scientists into corpora. Historians themselves are today increasingly producing
scholarly content in digital form, but there remains no established criteria
for the peer review of digital publications and projects. This ultimately
limits the time and energy the research community is willing to invest into
digital knowledge production and thus confines the Digital Humanities'
potential for growth.

Preservation and future access to digital materials is also of critical
importance, particularly in the North American context where continental and
national digital research infrastructures for digital humanities are lacking;
there is currently no equivalent to European research infrastructures like
CLARIN or DARIAH. In respect to scientific methodology, there is growing
expectation that historians take advantage of an abundance of digital tools,
yet there remains insufficient integration between tools for historical
research and between tool sets and online resources. The importance of citizen
science and knowledge co-creation for the future of historical research is also
recognized, yet for these developments to occur there must exist beyond e-lists
and other legacy communication technologies scholarly environments for the
creation of area-specific research communities, scientific collaboration, and
public engagement.

The planning for GH-D involved surveying over four hundred scholars of the many
thousands already using digital resources produced by the GHI. The
most prominent of these resources is the digital source collection „German
History in Documents and Images“ (GHDI), which is widely used at universities
in the German and English speaking world. Launched in 2003 and currently
undergoing a technical and conceptual revamp in conjunction with GH-D, GHDI
currently includes thousands of pages of English-language translations of
German historical texts, as well as images and maps, all of which are accessed
by approximately 5,000 visitors per day. Our planning for GH-D also continues
to involve consultations and workshops with expert historians and digital
humanists, and the establishment of partnerships with institutions and
major initiatives that share our concern for the future of history in the
digital age.

The German History-Digital platform addresses needs of digital scholarship
through five goals and integrated work packages concerted to these goals: 
discovery, analysis, production, preservation, and community.

We believe GH-D provides a new model in the design and development of a social
knowledge creation environment for humanities-oriented research. The proposed
paper will be structured by providing technical and theoretical explication of
the core work packages within relevant DH contexts.

Discovery

A major challenge facing scholarship online is that a vast number of digital
resources, particularly those produced independently by scholars or smaller
institutions, do not have standardized metadata records and are not accessible
via any centralized scientific index. GH-D involves development of a
peer-reviewed index of scholarly digital objects using Dublin Core

(DC) and CLARIN's Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) standards via a
customized Backlight technology stack.

Preservation

For scholars developing historical digital projects in North America, there
exists no inter-institutional infrastructure for preserving their data and
making it openly available. With consultative and knowledge support from
CLARIN-D, which is part of the European research infrastructure CLARIN, the
GH-D project will establish the first portal to CLARIN in North America at GHI
Washington. Central to this process is the implementation of a repository that
allows a sustainable storage of the content and the inclusion in a digital
environment to ease access, search and an interoperable data formats. The
content of the repository and the repository itself adheres to international,
widely accepted and supported standards. The high quality of the technical
solution and the conformance to standards is secured by an independent
organization that gives out the Data Seal of Approval. Like the majority of
CLARIN centres in Germany, the GH-D will use a Fedora Commons repository with
Apache Solr for indexing and search, components included in the technology
stack of Project Hydra. Our partnership with CLARIN promotes open access, open
science and knowledge co-creation in the North American context, and is an
important component in the overall digital humanities research strategy of the
GHI. As an institute of the Max Weber Stiftung, we are also in partnership with
DARIAH-DE and arrangements have been made for DARIAH to provide long term
preservation of GHI digital projects in their entirety, beginning with the
first edition of German History in Documents and Images. Beginning with the
GHDI project, GH-D is part of the DARIAH-DE Service Lifecycle program. 
Production and Publication

As a knowledge co-creation platform, GH-D will bring together editors,
researchers and citizen scientists in the development of innovative online
projects. Three such pilot projects are currently in development based on
customization, including support for TEI, and internationalization of the
Scalar 2.0 platform. GH-D is using Scalar 2.0 for the baseline content
management system, particularly on account of its interface features, support
for RDF, connectivity to external repositories, Dublin Core support.
Hypothes.is integration, and its multiple path navigation system.

Analysis

Historians are increasingly using digital humanities tools to analyze data and
express their research findings. A further advantage of storing digital
objects within the CLARIN repository the GHI wants to built up is that the full
range of corpus linguistic analytic tools of CLARIN can be applied by
scientists to GHI textual content. During the first phase of the project
we also look to prototyping connectivity to PARTHENOS, another major European
infrastructure project. PAR-THENOS integrates within a virtual research
environment (VRE) access to data from numerous national archives and a broad
set of digital tools which can be chained together into analytic processing
workflows. Community

The GH-D platform integrates blog aggregation, an advanced discussion system,
community-oriented tools, and social media, to facilitate
collaborative knowledge communities and open research. This is a pioneering
aspect of our project that will investigate the adoption by historians of
social and community digital tools in their research activities. We also
intend to make use of the unique role the GHI plays as a hub of transatlantic
scholarly dialogue and a major knot within an international network of
historians in order to facilitate connections between different
scholarly communities.

