Getting Medieval Open Access and Networked Pedagogy

Suzanne Akbari

s.akbari@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto, Canada

Alexandra Bolintineanu

alexandrabolintineanu@gmail.com University of Toronto, Canada

Getting Medieval: The Many Middle Ages is an undergraduate course, a
digitally-inflected introduction to the global Middle Ages. Getting Medieval
functions as an experiment in networked pedagogy, drawing on the expertise of
faculty researchers, curators, and digital scholarship specialists. Students
read medieval texts, handle related medieval artifacts from the University's
special collections, and curate digital collections and exhibits that bring
together texts, artifacts, and digital repositories from around the world.
Students also attend biweekly guest lectures by faculty researchers and
cultural heritage professionals. Our course is predicated on open access--to a
wider Middle Ages than the traditional western European canon reveals; to
open-source, open-access platforms for public scholarship and digital
collections; to a technical infrastructure open to members of the university
community; and to the fragile artifacts of the medieval past from the vaults of
local cultural heritage institutions.

We conceived the course as a series of moments in time and space, moments
defined by literary texts and related physical objects—when possible, objects
from the University of Toronto's Malcove Collection, which students can visit
in person. For example, the unit on Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales invited
students into fourteenth-century England, along the road from London to
Canterbury. Students learned about medieval pilgrimage and religious practices
around relics. In this context, they encountered Chaucer's pilgrims— and
especially the false-relic-peddling Pardoner. And in this context, too, they
touched and handled a twelfth-century French reliquary from the University of
Toronto's Art Centre. The course focuses on a wide variety of times, places,
and literary texts, beyond the traditional western European focus of Medieval
Studies: from eighth century Anglo-Saxon England and the Old English Beowulf to
tenth century medieval Spain and the interweaving of Jewish, Muslim, and
Christian theological and poetic traditions in the region of AlAndalus; from
the eleventh-century Japanese imperial court and Murasaki Shikibu's courtly 
Tale of Genji to the twelfth-century Anglo-Norman court and the lays of Marie
de France; from the cultural crossroads of the Ethiopian capital of Axum in the
thirteenth century to the cultural crossroads of the French capital of Paris
in the fourteenth; from the East-West journeys of Asian, Middle-Eastern, and
European travelers along the Silk Road, to the journey of Geoffrey Chaucer's
pilgrims from London to Canterbury. To do these varied traditions justice, we
invited guest speakers to introduce their research. In one class, students
listened to an Old English lexicographer talk about linguistic archaeology at
the Dictionary of Old English. In another, they learned about a digital
collection of medieval Tibetan letters, and they turned the pages of a
twentieth-century Tibetan book which maintains medieval book forms. In yet
another, students experienced a lecture that turned into a performance of
medieval drama. The lectures provide access not only to the usual undergraduate
curriculum, but to a range of faculty-led research projects that showcase the
range of Medieval Studies at Toronto.

The digital inflection of the course is twofold. First, students examine how
the times, places, texts, and things we study are represented in digital
projects and repositories, from the Dictionary of Old English to
the International Dunhuang Project. Second, students are invited to create
public-facing scholarship themselves: After they visit the secure storage
spaces of the Mal-cove Collection and receive the curator's guidance on the
care, handling, and cultural context of artifacts, students handle medieval
artifacts; study them in the context of our local collection and of digital
repositories around the world; and produce a public, curated digital collection
and exhibit, linking the artifact to the course's thematics, in the open-source
content management platform Omeka. In so doing, students practice close reading
and slow looking, examining an object in cultural and literary contexts. They
also learn about digital collections—from the digitization of materials to data
curation and digital preservation—and about scholarly communication
possibilities in the digital age.

We designed our digital assignments with access in mind. The students' initial
contact with the secure

vaults of the Malcove Collection offered hands-on, immediate, physical access
to the artifacts—and included a discussion on the kinds of information such
access provides, information unavailable in a digital medium. The software
platform Omeka itself is free, opensource, with significant traction in DH
pedagogy. Our hosted Omeka instances allow students to complete the work even
if they only have access to public university computers. Our tutorials guide
students through the work in interactive workshops conducted in university
computer laboratories, ensuring that students without a laptop, or without
prior technical experience, are able to complete their work in a supportive
environment, with help close at hand. But this level of access requires
significant logistical work and infrastructure. Students have access to faculty
research projects thanks to the Centre for Medieval Studies' network of
scholars. Students are able to use university laboratories because we make
arrangements in collaboration with digital scholarship librarians to
provide access to this portion of UofToronto's computing infrastructure.
Students are able to experience relevant artifacts from the Malcove collection
so closely because of a course-long collaboration between its Collections

Manager, Heather Pigat, and the course instructors.

Thus Getting Medieval functions as an experiment in networked pedagogy.
Biweekly guest lectures, robustly integrated into the curriculum, invite a
network of faculty researchers and cultural heritage professionals into the
undergraduate classroom; and the open access requirements of our digital
projects draw on the institution's physical and human infrastruc-ture—from
special collections of medieval objects to computing facilities; from curators
to medievalists to digital scholarship specialists. As we invite our students
on a time-travelling journey across the global Middle Ages, we rely on a
network of guides to open points of access along the way.

