Online Shadow Libraries and the Future of Humanities Scholarship

Stephen Reid McLaughlin

stephen.mclaughlin@utexas.edu

University of Texas Austin, United States of America

In a publishing landscape long challenged by small audiences, tightening
library budgets, and steady growth in the number of monographs produced
each year, potentially illegal text sharing has become an everyday practice for
many humanities scholars and students, both those with access to conventional
distributions channels (libraries, online databases, interlibrary loan) as well
as independent scholars and those at institutions with limited library
resources. Whereas many researchers in medicine and natural science disciplines
have embraced open access publication practices, both in open-licensed journals
and via centralized preprint repositories, access to scholarship in humanities
fields poses greater challenges.

Due to humanities monographs' limited commercial value, many titles are only
commercially available for a short window. As Borgman has noted, “[l]itera-ture
in the humanities goes out of print long before it goes out of date” (2007:
241), while older works from university presses are “virtually entombed”
(McGann, 2014: 133) in the stacks of academic libraries. Meanwhile, factors
including rising journal prices and an increase in the number of monographs
published each year have led libraries to purchase proportionally fewer
monographs than in past decades (Thompson,

2005: 103-6). In turn, humanities scholars’ reputation

for “unreadable complexity” (Eve, 2014: 22) may be exacerbated by the
unavailability of published research. By contrast, informal circulation can
provide a double benefit to scholars, allowing them to secure the prestige of
publishing with a name-brand university press while reaching a larger audience
than would be possible in print alone (Hall 2013). In this paper, I draw on
public metadata sets, download logs from Sci-Hub (Bohannon and Elbakyan, 2016),
and interviews with operators and users of illicit text sharing sites
to examine their place in contemporary humanities scholarship.

A decade ago, illicit text collections, also known as shadow libraries (Liang
2012; Bodo 2015, 2016), were limited in size and existed on the margins of
academic culture. Today, one can find millions of books and tens of millions of
journal articles spread among Library Genesis, Aaaaarg, and Sci-Hub, as well as
in niche collections such as Memory of the World and Monoskop Log. And yet,
these sites’ coverage of literary works and literary scholarship is
significantly shallower than is the case for published research in medicine,
engineering, and the social sciences.

Most shadow libraries are messy, ad hoc affairs, composed of digital objects in
a range of formats and quality levels, drawn from a pre-existing ecosystem
of interpersonal text sharing among scholars and students. Metadata for the 1.5
million documents in Library Genesis, which is freely available, exhibits
what we might call bounded messiness. A tabular dataset riddled with missing
values, text encoding quirks, and duplicate entries, it clearly would not pass
muster in an academic library setting. However, the simplicity and flexibility
of this system make it well-suited for a text collection compiled, maintained,
and mirrored by a culturally diverse community of participants. In this case, a
just-good-enough database supports the goals of inclusiveness and replication
by others.

In interviews with scholars who use shadow libraries, I have observed a wide
range of positions with respect to copyright law and the business of scholarly
publishing. While some hope for a future in which copyright is abolished and
publishers are driven out of business, many are essentially satisfied with the
scholarly publishing ecosystem as it stands today. Most use library resources
and purchase physical books, turning to shadow libraries to fill the gaps and
evaluate texts’ relevance and quality. Nearly all respondents said they prefer
to read printed texts when the option is available. Moreover, if the cost of
these sites’ continued existence is that they remain culturally marginal, my
participants see this as an acceptable tradeoff.

Several interview participants described their personal document management
schemes, an age-old form of scholarly labor that typically remains invisible to
outsiders. What is new, however, is that some avid collectors are
systematically compiling clean copies of their personal libraries, along with
extensive metadata and searchable full-text indexes. They then share
these collections among colleagues, either on hard drives or in private online
repositories. One respondent described this text curation practice as both a
pedagogical strategy and an attempt to shape the scholarly canon in his field
of study.

There are no easy answers to the problems shadow

libraries pose for publishers and university libraries,

leading Bodo (2016) to suggest we should “bet on all horses,” throwing support
behind academic publishers and shadow libraries alike. For now, exploring
how where shadow libraries come from, how they are designed, curated, and
maintained, and what their futures may hold — including the eventual,
inevitable, closure of individual sites — may help us understand current
academic culture and possible future models for humanities research and
scholarly culture more broadly.

