Text Mining Eighteenth-Century Travel Writing: The “I” and Autobiography
of Narration

Catherine Nygren

catherine.nygren@mail.mcgill.ca McGill University, Canada

How can text mining further explore and challenge our conception of how the
style of British travel writing changed from 1700 to 1830? In this poster,
drawn from the first chapter of my dissertation, I use text mining methods to
explore the purported coming forth of the self in eighteenth-century travel
writing, examining texts ranging from instructions for gentlemen and
antiquarian accounts to the documents of New World explorers and the journals
of female travelers. Increasing public demand for travel-related texts and the
genre's potential for experimenting and examining social, philosophical, and
aesthetic ideas elevated travel literature to one of the most important -and
popular - genres of the century. Despite the modern broadening of the
definition of travel literature and analyses that use the lenses of feminism
and postcolonialism, however, overviews of travel writing still primarily use
close readings and representative samples of texts to make claims about the
genre as a whole.

My project, however, will use a corpus of more than 3500 texts (curated through
a combination of existing bibliographies and machine learning methods) to
examine and challenge our received literary histories of the genre. In
particular, this presentation focuses on the “I” and autobiography in
narration. In the first half of the eighteenth century, authors crafted travel
texts to have a balanced amount of personal narration: the voice of the
narrator was required to provide order, entertainment, and authority in the
narrative, but with an over-emphatic voice, the author would appear
egotistical, fantastical, and unreliable. By the middle of the century,
however, scholars identify a trend of authors increasingly writing in a
first-person voice and interpolating their detached, factual observations
with their personal experiences and reflections. Around the turn of the
century, when many locations, particularly Grand Tour destinations like France
and Italy, had been described multiple times, readers desired more original
writing and critics used personal narration as evidence that the author had
actually travelled. Still, authors often felt they had to justify writing in a
distinctive voice: Mary Wollstonecraft, when she found she could not “avoid
being continually the first per-son—‘the little hero of each tale,'” became
“determined to let [her] remarks and reflections flow unrestrained” (3). In
this poster, therefore, I seek to examine this purported coming forth of the
self in eighteenth-century travel literature. Tracking distributions of
pronouns, such as “I,” “me,” and “you,” and other narrative signifiers will
reveal the shifting trends of personal narration in my corpus. Analyzing the
words used in titles—such as “Observations,” “Reflections,” and epistolary
markers, among others—may provide further insight into how authors and
publishers conceptualized and marketed the relationship between the author, the
narrator, and the reading public. In examining such patterns, I seek to answer
questions such as whether the pieces we consider more “literary” use the
first-person voice more often or more experimentally, whether particular
sub-genres or texts in my corpus are more likely than others to follow
this trend, and whether any other shifts in grammar and vocabulary accompanied
this new privileging of firstperson narration. A corollary question is whether

Sterne’s Sentimental Journey is, as several critics contend, truly a catalyst
for this trend, and how the influence of Sterne and other significant authors
manifest in my corpus. In particular, I will pay close attention to female
writers and authors of colour, following the work of critics such as Elizabeth
Bohls, in order to see how they subvert and support the trends of
travel writing at that time.

This first chapter on the self, along with my dissertation’s examinations of
descriptive language and subgenre, will provide an extensive understanding of
eighteenth-century British travel writing. My approach encourages both breadth
and depth in subject material, from patterns across hundreds of texts to
significant paragraphs, sentences and words. This mixture of distant and close
reading will offer a reformulation of the massive genre by, for the first time,
analyzing a significantly larger corpus than was previously possible. My
findings and methodology (shared through Github and other public forums) will
provide critical resources and frameworks for future investigations of the
language and genre of other forms of eighteenth-century literatures.

