Let's Develop an

Infrastructure for Historical Research Tools

Julia Luise Damerow

jdamerow@asu.edu

Arizona State University, United States of America

Dirk Wintergrün

dwinter@mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Germany

Robert Casties

casties@mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Germany

Scholars conducting historical research are provided with a growing range of
digital humanities tools, supporting different phases of the research
process: there is software for extracting text from documents

(such as pdftotex, available on many Linux distributions or as part of
Poppler), run OCR processes on images (for example Tesseract), tools for the
creation, analysis, and visualization of datasets (for instance Nodegoat, 
Palladio, or Visualeyes), or software to work with annotations (for example 
Annotation Studio) or networks (such as Gephi or Cytoscape). Programming
libraries are being developed to serve the needs of humanity scholars, like 
Spacy or Tethne. There are several repositories (such as HathiTrust or the 
Europeana) that provide access to sources and can easily be integrated into
other services through APIs. Many tools, however, work well as self-contained
units that scholars can use as singular parts of their research process, but
cannot easily be combined into an integrated workflow by the researcher.
Existing and new tools are developed using different languages and programming
frameworks depending on requirements, skillset, and preference of the original
developer, making reuse and integration harder for the developer seeking to
combine several tools. Moreover, since most tools are developed independently
of each other, many efforts are repeated by reimplementing functionality that
is already provided by a different piece of software.

In this workshop, we would like to gather developers and programming-literate
scholars to share their tool-building experiences and to present our
first practical steps to create a system integrating multiple tools to work
with historical documents from scan to analysis. The workshop is intended as a
starting point for future exchange and cooperation for digital humanities
developers.

In the summer of 2016, the Digital Innovation Group at Arizona State University
(ASU) and the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science (MPIWG) started
to combine their efforts in developing software for the history of science. One
outcome of this collaboration is a research system that allows users to manage
their documents, automatically runs OCR on uploaded files, provides an image
viewer for uploaded and extracted images, and integrates document management
with a multi-user Jupyter notebook server for writing analysis and
visualization scripts. Rather than one big system, however, the research system
is comprised of several integrated services developed independently of each
other using different programming languages and frameworks.

For the Digital Humanities Conference 2017, we propose a full-day workshop with
the goal to connect different tools and services to build a tool infrastructure
for historical research.

The first half of the workshop will give tool developers a chance to present
their software. Every presenter will be allowed 10 minutes for their
presentation and 5 minutes for questions. ASU and MPIWG will present the
different components of the developed research system. Specifically, we will
present the following projects:

•    Collaborative Jupyter Notebooks: a Ju-

pyter Notebook server that allows sharing and publishing of notebooks based on
Next-cloud and Dataverse.

•    DocuManager: an environment for annotating, correcting and searching
digital documents, in particular for OCR text in ALTOXML and HOCR.

•    Giles Ecosystem: an Apache Kafka-based service to extract images and texts
from documents and run OCR procedures on them.

•    Digilib: a Java-based IIIF-compliant image server and viewer.

The second half will be dedicated to discussing how different tools can be
connected and integrated, and how we can build a community around those tools.

We envision the results of this workshop to be a concrete roadmap of how
different tools will be integrated. We will define interfaces and API
requirements, and if possible start development work during the workshop.
Second, we will develop an organizational strategy for cooperation and
collaboration among different projects. To aid organization, we will provide a
Jira and Confluence project that participants can use during and after the
workshop to organize collaboration.

We plan on organizing a follow-up meeting at the end of 2017 at Arizona State
University to review progress since the initial workshop and plan next steps.
If the collaboration is successful, we hope to establish regular meetings and
expand the group to connect more tools and services.

Participants/Call

We will send out a call for participation in form of a short tool presentation
for the first part of the workshop. We will ask presenters to focus on the
technical perspective of their tool answering the following key questions:

• What is the general workflow of the tool?

• What is the core functionality of the tool?

• What input and output formats does the tool accept? Or what interfaces does
it expose?

• What license model was chosen?

• What features are still missing and what are the next development goals?

• How is maintenance and development of the tool organized?

The deadline for the call is July 1st, 2017. We plan to accept 5-10 submission
for our call, based on the usefulness of the tool and the potential for
integration with other tools, which would all fit the first half of
the workshop.

Audience

The target audience for this workshop are developers, historians with
programming background, scholars with a technical background, and generally
people involved in the development of tools to support historical research.

• Dirk Wintergrün (Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Germany)

• Julia Damerow (Arizona State University, USA)

• Robert Casties (Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Germany)

• Malte Vogl (Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Germany)

Confirmed Presenters

