Hands on Text Analytics with Orange

Ajda Pretnar

ajda.pretnar@fri.uni-lj.si

University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

Niko Colneric

niko.colneric@fri.uni-lj.si

University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

Lan Zagar

lan.zagar@fri.uni-lj.si

University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

Orange for Text Analytics

In recent years, the digital humanities community has been introduced to many
powerful tools for text analysis, but few of these tools combine powerful
data mining and machine learning algorithms within a simple and capable user
interface. For flexible and creative analysis, researchers need a tool that
focuses on intuition, visualizations and interactivity.

This workshop will introduce participants to Orange, a visual programming
environment for data mining, suitable for both beginners and experts.
Particular emphasis will be placed on its Text add-on, which offers components
for text mining, visualization and deep- learning-based embedding.

This is a hands-on workshop, where the participants will actively construct
analytical workflows and go through case studies with the help of the
instructors. They will learn how to manage textual data, preprocess it, use
machine learning, data projection and visualisation techniques to expose hidden
patterns and evaluate the resulting models. At the end of the workshop, the
participants will know how to use visual programming to seamlessly construct
powerful data analysis workflows, which can be applied to a wide range of
challenges in digital humanities.

Structure of the Workshop

Part 1: Visual programming, workflows, data input and preprocessing

First, we will show the basics of Orange: how to load the data, inspect and
visualize it. Participants will be introduced to several options for data
import, from standard Corpus to Twitter, Guardian and Text Import. Once the
corpus is loaded, we will preprocess it and display the result in a word cloud.
A particular emphasis will be on the use of custom preprocessing techniques and
how to successfully apply them to the corpus. The results of each technique
will be observed in an interactive word cloud and concordances.

[653-1]

Figure 1: Preprocessing results displayed in a word cloud

Part 2: Machine learning and deep-learning-based embedding for predictive
analysis

Next, we will use Twitter data to construct an author prediction pipeline and
test some classifiers. We will fetch author Timelines from Twitter and
observe the retrieved corpus. This time we will introduce a pre-trained tweet
tokenizer and pass the preprocessed corpus through a bag of words. We will
discuss bag of words parameters and how to best prepare the data for further
analysis. The results of using different parameters will be observed in a data
table to understand the underlying data structures. For comparison, we will use
deep-learning-based embedding to derive vector representation of tweets and in
this way enable machine learning.

We will explain how we can use machine learning in text mining and introduce a
number of techniques for predictive analysis. We will use cross-validation
to test the constructed bag of words models and compare classification scores
for each algorithm. We will discuss the quality of constructed models and
what scores are usually the best for observing model quality. Additionally, we
will inspect misclassified tweets in a confusion matrix and even further in
Corpus Viewer, to leverage the possibilities of a close(r) reading.

Part 3: Data clustering, sentiment analysis, image and geo analytics

In the third part, we will work on geomapping and image analytics. We will
transform textual and visual data into feature vectors and plot these data onto
a world map to discover interesting relations.

We will discuss how to acquire geolocated data from Twitter and why this is
useful. Next, we will use geotagged Twitter data and apply a pre-trained
sentiment analysis model to acquire sentiment orientation. We will map the
sentiment-tagged tweets and explore how to use sentiment together with
geomapping.

Finally, the participants will be introduced to image analytics for humanities
research. We will explain why and how to transform raw images into
multidimensional vectors and how to work with the new data. We will cluster
Instagram images into groups and explore how to map image-containing tweets on
a world map. Do images correspond to geolocation? We will see.

[653-2]

Figure 2: Images from social media are embedded with ImageNet embedding,
clustered with Hierarchical Clustering and displayed on a map by their
geolocation.

