Shaping Humanities Data: Use, Reuse, and Paths Toward Computationally Amenable
Cultural Heritage Collections

Thomas Padilla

thomaspadilla@ucsb.edu

UC Santa Barbara, United States of America

Sarah Potvin

spotvin@library.tamu.edu

Texas A&M University, United States of America

Laurie Allen

laallen@upenn.edu

University of Pennsylvania, United States of America

Stewart Varner

svarner@sas.upenn.edu

University of Pennsylvania, United States of America

Galleries, libraries, archives, and museums (GLAMs) increasingly seek to make
digitized and borndigital collections accessible as data optimized
for computational methods and tools common to the Digital Humanities.
Preparation and publication of collections as data extends possible collection
use beyond the analog object interactions that collection interfaces tend to
try and emulate. In line with open data efforts, libraries, archives, and
museums typically work to assign open licenses to these data. Current access
methods are widely divergent, spanning simple provision of compressed
collection objects in ZIP files, exposing static collection websites that can
be crawled using a tool like rsync, leveraging Github for text collection
access, provisioning an API, enabling FTP access to collections, mediating
computational processes performed on collection data through a platform, to
facilitating data access through use of torrent technology. Concurrently, in
response to researcher requests for data-mining, commercial publishers have
developed a range of processes for delivering proprietary corpuses with terms
and conditions that significantly limit or expressly forbid data sharing,
including providing libraries with physical hard drives loaded with the data.
There are no consensus-driven best practices that guide the generation,
description, and provisioning of computationally amenable GLAM collections for
the range of communities that fall within the Digital Humanities. Without best
practices in this space, institutions run the risk of misplaced investment of
resources that foster the creation of irregular, ultimately disorienting data
access environments. Indeed, the panoply of institutional approaches poses
a challenge to GLAM institutions seeking best practices and clear guidelines
for publishing collections as data.

One major barrier to the development of consensus-driven best practice is an
incomplete understanding of how digital humanists, among others, are using and
reusing cultural heritage data. This workshop aims to make progress towards
bridging that gap. Research indicates that types of use exhibited by
digital humanists include but are not limited to text analysis, image analysis,
mapping, sound analysis, and network

analysis. Orientation to the full scope of academic use

types can be gained through in-depth analysis of data

use practices across disciplines as represented in core Digital Humanities
journals (Padilla and Higgins 2016), by reviewing works at the annual global
Digital Humanities conference (Weingart 2016), and by studying edited volumes
that have to this point effectively compiled a broad range of research in this
space (Gold 2012; Gold and Klein 2016; Burdick, Drucker, Lunen-feld et al 2012;
Schreibman, Siemens, Unsworth 2016).

This workshop will build upon this orientation by engaging directly with
digital humanists' existing and projected research and pedagogical practices
that draw upon ever growing GLAM collections. Blending short talks by
practitioners, guided discussion, and workshopping of the organizers' draft
framework (further described below), the workshop will focus on how researchers
and educators use GLAM collections that have been made accessible as data, and
will extend to consider how these uses should inform collection creation and
access.

The organizers of this workshop are members of the project team for “Always
Already Computational: Library Collections as Data,” an effort sponsored by the
Institute of Museum and Library Services in the United States of America
through their National Forum grant program. The organizers have observed that
GLAM approaches to the preparation of collections as data are often heavily
influenced by national or regional priorities and associated
infrastructures. Yet the use and reuse of these open data is
necessarily international. While the organizers of the workshop are US-based,
the workshop aims to surface geograph-ically-diverse praxis. The short talks in
the workshop have been selected through an open CFP facilitated by an
international program committee.

The workshop may be structured thematically, based on talks and demos solicited
via the CFP. Participants will be encouraged to consider how efforts to develop
computationally amenable collections, which run the risk of recreating and
reinforcing long standing biases inherent in cultural heritage collection
practice, provide an opportunity to reframe, enrich, and/or contextualize
collections in a manner that seeks to avoid replication of bias.

Potential themes may include:

• Use and Reuse: How are data used and reused? What methods and tools are
commonly employed? Do these differ by disciplinary community? What types of
data are used? What types of data are desired but are difficult to use for
reasons included but not limited to copyright status, content type (e.g. video,
audio, web, software), size? How, when, and where are data reused? What factors
enhance or inhibit the likelihood of data reuse?

• Access: What can we learn from our collective experiences working to access
data from within and outside of the cultural heritage community? What are
preferred methods of data access? What factors should be considered when
deciding among access methods? When is simple click and download of
bulk collections appropriate? What characteristics define an optimally useful
API (application programming interface) for a wide range of users with varying
technical expertise? Is an API always the best route to go? Are there a mix of
options that should be considered? What considerations inform development of
those access options?

• Description and Discovery: How do digital humanists locate appropriate data?
What tools are used to search for data? What information about the data is
necessary to enable use? When compiling meta-collections of data, how are
digital humanists maintaining provenance and merging    disparate

metadata?

Burdick, A., Drucker, J. and Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T. and Schnapp, J. (Eds)
(2012). Digital_Humanities. Cambridge: MIT Press. https://mitpress.mit.edu/
books/dig-italhumanities

Gold, M. (Ed) (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/1

Gold, M. and Klein, L. (Eds) (2016). Debates in the Digital Humanities.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/
debates/2

Padilla, T., Higgins, D. (2016). Data Praxis in the Digital Humanities: Use,
Production, Access. In Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts.
Jagiellonian University

& Pedagogical University, Krakow, pp. 644-646.

Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (Eds). (2016). A New Companion to
Digital Humanities. 2nd

edition. Wiley-Blackwell.

Weingart, S. (2016). “Submissions to DH2016 (pt. 1).” On the scottbot irregular
. http://scottbot.net/submissions-

to-dh2016-pt-1/

